Caption: original land their sovereignty was
Caption: never seeded
Caption: i also want to tip my heart to the old
Caption: men and women the aboriginal and torres
Caption: strait islander mentors that i myself
Caption: had growing up because among many other
Caption: incredibly valuable lessons that i
Caption: learned from them they taught me about
Caption: the importance of stories and i wouldn't
Caption: be here giving this presentation to you
Caption: today without them
Caption: i also want to thank all of the sponsors
Caption: who have made this possible it has been
Caption: amazing to be able to come from
Caption: melbourne to perth to do this all ready
Caption: to meet so many awesome people
Caption: and it would not be possible without all
Caption: of the sponsors
Caption: you've kind of got the introduction
Caption: there that's me my name is dawn
Caption: my day job is i'm an engineer at enabler
Caption: we are a tiny little consultancy in
Caption: melbourne we love solving devops and
Caption: cloudy type problems that's what i do in
Caption: my day job if you want to know more
Caption: about that you can ask me more
Caption: but the reason that i'm here speaking to
Caption: all of you today is because i am an
Caption: accidental accessibility advocate we're
Caption: going to get back to that one
Caption: as hannah said outside work i am an
Caption: occasional author and kitchen alchemist
Caption: sometimes that ends really well
Caption: sometimes doesn't i am also a raging
Caption: sportsball fan hence that picture and
Caption: this being me in boston bruins clothing
Caption: that's a hockey team for the record
Caption: so the accidental accessibility advocate
Caption: bit
Caption: the last two words of that are very easy
Caption: to understand
Caption: the accidental is a bit less so and in
Caption: order to explain that i need to take you
Caption: on a little bit of a tour
Caption: and we are going to start that tour in
Caption: the uk with this excellent disabled
Caption: toilet which is down the set of stairs
Caption: i don't know if any of you have ever
Caption: tried to take a wheelchair down a set of
Caption: stairs do not recommend
Caption: over in new zealand much closer to home
Caption: we do actually have a ramp to be able to
Caption: get into this building but unfortunately
Caption: for the poor power chair user who's
Caption: currently sitting and staring at it it
Caption: is blocked off by a couple of large
Caption: orange traffic cones again if you want
Caption: to get into the building not absolutely
Caption: conducive to that
Caption: and finally
Caption: the place where i could save this talk
Caption: in the place where i live in melbourne
Caption: we have these exolus around the place
Caption: space age public toilets if you will
Caption: and the reason why
Caption: these made it into a talk about
Caption: accidental accessibility advocacy
Caption: is because they have a cleaning cycle
Caption: which runs
Caption: and that is indicated by a large light
Caption: which will go on in the cubicle of the
Caption: toilet
Caption: there is also a panel in the toilet
Caption: which explains that when the large light
Caption: goes on you should vacate because it's
Caption: about to start its cleaning cycle
Caption: that panel is translated into braille
Caption: braille
Caption: blind people
Caption: light
Caption: doesn't quite compute there
Caption: so
Caption: before i get on let's define a few
Caption: important terms
Caption: to begin with
Caption: disability
Caption: by the australian definition is a
Caption: continuing condition which restricts
Caption: everyday activities
Caption: a continuing condition means that it's
Caption: likely to last for six months or more
Caption: the restricting everyday activities bit
Caption: is fairly self-explanatory
Caption: then there's accessibility and that's
Caption: the degree to which an activity can be
Caption: done by everyone
Caption: now this is not just about disability
Caption: one case study that i like to use here
Caption: is from about december 2009 if anyone
Caption: remembers hp's racist webcam where a
Caption: black gentleman had gone out and bought
Caption: himself a state-of-the-art hp laptop
Caption: which had a wonderful web camera which
Caption: was supposed to be able to do facial
Caption: recognition except it couldn't until he
Caption: got his white co-worker to test it
Caption: and then there's adaptive technology and
Caption: those are tools that disable people to
Caption: use to improve access
Caption: that can be exceptionally low tech this
Caption: my walking stick is a piece of adaptive
Caption: technology wheelchairs are adaptive
Caption: technology some things that we use in
Caption: architecture like ramps can be part of
Caption: adaptive technology
Caption: but in the broader sense in terms of
Caption: technical pieces of adaptive technology
Caption: we're talking here about things like
Caption: screen readers things like adaptive and
Caption: augmentative communication things which
Caption: are essentially attached to a computer
Caption: and warning this is where we get
Caption: political for a minute
Caption: excuse me
Caption: as i get back to the right slide
Caption: there are broadly two different ways
Caption: that we can define disability
Caption: the medical model and the social model
Caption: the medical model of disability holds
Caption: that disability itself is a problem that
Caption: disability is something that we should
Caption: try to resolve something that we should
Caption: try to cure and that is illustrated here
Caption: by this uh clip-up blob in a wheelchair
Caption: being comforted by a vaguely
Caption: doctor-looking clip-art blog
Caption: on the other hand the social model holds
Caption: that it's not so much disability that's
Caption: the problem it's accessibility that we
Caption: shouldn't be trying to change people we
Caption: should be trying to change the world
Caption: around them to make it easier to
Caption: navigate and when that goes well that's
Caption: illustrated by things like adaptive
Caption: sports that we have over here you know
Caption: these people who are playing sports in
Caption: wheelchairs look perfectly happy doing
Caption: and i wouldn't want to dismiss the
Caption: medical model entirely because there are
Caption: some great interventions that have come
Caption: out of that but for the purposes of the
Caption: work that we're doing the way that i
Caption: would suggest that we look at this is
Caption: through the lens of the social model we
Caption: want to try to modify the environment to
Caption: make it easier for people to use
Caption: and if you're here i feel pretty
Caption: confident in saying that this is part of
Caption: your job
Caption: so to illustrate that let's look at a
Caption: few case studies of how this goes well
Caption: and how this goes badly
Caption: this is onggren.net and i didn't have to
Caption: look very hard to find this it's on a
Caption: great many list of top 10 worst websites
Caption: ever
Caption: and it's visually very cluttered you can
Caption: see that i mean it would probably make
Caption: more sense to me if i spoke norwegian
Caption: but you've got a bunch of pictures here
Caption: which are all very confused you've got a
Caption: bunch of colors there's not really a
Caption: whole lot of structure to it
Caption: and it would not surprise you that if
Caption: you try to navigate on grand.net with a
Caption: screen reader you're going to have a
Caption: great deal of difficulty doing it
Caption: because that structure that's replicated
Caption: that structure that we see here visually
Caption: is replicated in the lack of structure
Caption: that you get when trying to navigate it
Caption: with a screen reader there's a hell of a
Caption: lot of red and green here and that's
Caption: really difficult for colorblind people
Caption: unsurprisingly many of the images here
Caption: don't actually have alt text and it's
Caption: also not clear which images are tied to
Caption: which links because of the lack of
Caption: structure
Caption: and then there's distinctive design
Caption: this is ling's cars and you may or may
Caption: not believe this but this is actually
Caption: one of the most successful car leasing
Caption: businesses in the united kingdom
Caption: and it is built around the brand of link
Caption: valentine the owner and the brand is
Caption: obvious
Caption: ling's face is animated the uh tongue
Caption: with british flag on it is animated the
Caption: traffic lights are animated and my
Caption: favorite bit which i couldn't get into
Caption: this screenshot from when i originally
Caption: took it was the gif of boris johnson
Caption: shrugging used to illustrate the boris
Caption: brexit guarantee that if the uk left the
Caption: eu the cost of leasing your car would
Caption: not go up
Caption: but if you want to build a distinctive
Caption: website like this there are a lot of
Caption: considerations that go into it
Caption: you have to think about things like that
Caption: text across the top
Caption: that's not text that's actually clip art
Caption: so it's not necessarily going to be
Caption: immediately apparent that that's the
Caption: launching point of your page and you
Caption: also need to then add alt text to it you
Caption: can have issues with backgrounds making
Caption: it difficult for people to navigate
Caption: things
Caption: you know there is a lot of alt text that
Caption: has gone into this website but when i
Caption: originally looked at it there wasn't a
Caption: lot of it there there were a lot of
Caption: scenarios where pictures were used to
Caption: illustrate things
Caption: without something that would be backed
Caption: up by a screen reader and if you have
Caption: photo photo sensitivity problems you are
Caption: not going to have fun trying to navigate
Caption: this site
Caption: then there's an example of good design
Caption: and this is one that probably a lot of
Caption: us use every day and that is github
Caption: github does a few things really well
Caption: that are not necessarily intuitive to
Caption: start with if you look at that top bar
Caption: over there you can see that you've got
Caption: the github logo the search bar but then
Caption: next to it you've actually got pull
Caption: requests issues marketplace explore and
Caption: those are easy anchors for screen reader
Caption: users to be able to get to the areas of
Caption: github that they might frequently use
Caption: github is very very good about not just
Caption: conveying information with color the
Caption: layout is quite easy to understand
Caption: visually it scales very well
Caption: and this is actually a screenshot of the
Caption: nvda repo the free and open source
Caption: screen reader for windows and the people
Caption: who developed nvda migrated it over to
Caption: github because they found that for their
Caption: users
Caption: the vast majority of whom are screen
Caption: reader users github was a very easy way
Caption: for them to submit bugs
Caption: if you want to do this well there are a
Caption: bunch of resources for it
Caption: the web content accessibility guides are
Caption: sort of the canonical resource
Caption: but if you find those too difficult or
Caption: if you're doing this for the first time
Caption: and you want something that's a bit
Caption: easier to understand the accessibility
Caption: project has produced a checklist where
Caption: you can just go down the checklist and
Caption: it conveys it all to you in a much
Caption: simpler manner and you can pretty much
Caption: just tick boxes to work out do you
Caption: actually follow the guidelines
Caption: one thing that i don't talk very much
Caption: about in this talk is designing for
Caption: intellectual and cognitive disabilities
Caption: but the main resource that you're going
Caption: to want for that is the u.s federal
Caption: plain language guidelines these are
Caption: published by the us government and they
Caption: provide you instructions on how to use
Caption: plain clear english which is going to be
Caption: easier for people with intellectual and
Caption: cognitive disabilities to understand
Caption: and there's a blind lady called christy
Caption: veers who produced a video which went
Caption: viral on twitter showing how she uses
Caption: her iphone and this i think is a really
Caption: important thing for people to see
Caption: not because
Caption: well because it shows you what's
Caption: possible when you think outside the box
Caption: and when you design these things
Caption: taking into account a wide variety of
Caption: different perspectives the iphone has
Caption: braille keyboards it has a great number
Caption: of haptic touch features which deliver
Caption: data that you would usually only get
Caption: visually
Caption: in the resources for accessible design
Caption: there are a there's a web page which
Caption: links to a whole list of different
Caption: resources i'm going to call out a few of
Caption: them here that i think are important and
Caption: the first one is the ax core
Caption: accessibility testing library
Caption: now this is very important for
Caption: accessibility because it is entirely
Caption: open source and it's what google's
Caption: accessibility checker and a lot of other
Caption: similar things are built on
Caption: the color oracle desktop filter is a
Caption: very important one for color blindness
Caption: and the reason why i'm calling this tool
Caption: out specifically is there are a bunch of
Caption: browser extensions that you can get but
Caption: the color oracle desktop filter is the
Caption: only one that will allow you to
Caption: plug it into desktop applications as
Caption: well so if you're developing a desktop
Caption: application rather than a web
Caption: application that's a very useful tool
Caption: if you want to test what you're doing
Caption: with a screen reader the patch yellow
Caption: group one of the very early
Caption: accessibility consultancies produced a
Caption: list of basic screen reader commands for
Caption: pretty much all of the common screen
Caption: readers and you can just get those up on
Caption: a computer and try them out yourself
Caption: additionally
Caption: the researchers at the university of
Caption: maryland produce the photosensitive
Caption: epilepsy analysis tool a few years ago
Caption: and that one is really important because
Caption: photosensitive epilepsy is a disability
Caption: that we can't ask people to test for
Caption: if you're asking people to test for that
Caption: and they have a seizure that's
Caption: potentially going to be threatening to
Caption: their health or in the worst case
Caption: threatening to their life so the
Caption: researchers at the university of
Caption: maryland produce this tool which
Caption: basically allows you to check contrast
Caption: and animations on your website to ensure
Caption: that they're not going to be a problem
Caption: for people with photosensitive epilepsy
Caption: now guidelines are great guidelines are
Caption: a really good starting point but
Caption: guidelines do not tell the whole story
Caption: this really comes down to
Caption: that often misused adage of the 80 20
Caption: principle and i'll sum it up like this
Caption: the vast majority of accessibility
Caption: issues that you might run into can be
Caption: very easily solved by looking at and
Caption: understanding the guidelines
Caption: but there are some accessibility issues
Caption: that the guidelines don't cover and
Caption: there are situations where the
Caption: guidelines are misleading
Caption: in those sorts of scenarios
Caption: what you want to do is make sure that
Caption: you have a clear and understandable path
Caption: for people who have those issues to come
Caption: to you
Caption: report them
Caption: and get them to the right people so that
Caption: they are going to be actioned
Caption: and with most accessibility talks this
Caption: is the point at which the person giving
Caption: the talk would explain to you how to
Caption: solve one particular problem in one
Caption: particular language for one particular
Caption: scenario
Caption: this is not one of that talks and the
Caption: reason for that is because i think it's
Caption: often very instructive to look at the
Caption: ways that people do this wrong
Caption: so that we can learn from them and
Caption: hopefully not repeat the mistakes
Caption: this is atlassian confluence and my
Caption: assumption is that the vast majority of
Caption: the people in the audience here have
Caption: used atlassian confluence before for
Caption: those of you who haven't it's basically
Caption: a shared documentation wiki so you've
Caption: got a test space here you've got a bunch
Caption: of data you can click around it you can
Caption: go in and create pages and when you
Caption: click the button to create a page you
Caption: get something back that looks a bit like
Caption: this
Caption: and that
Caption: looks
Caption: fine
Caption: right
Caption: but we're going to go back and look at
Caption: that again because
Caption: despite the fact that this page was
Caption: created in my test space which you can
Caption: see because my name is up there
Caption: i actually wasn't the person who created
Caption: it it was created by someone called
Caption: matthew gregory and at the time that i
Caption: first gave this talk matt was my manager
Caption: so why was it that matt was the person
Caption: who was creating this page and not me
Caption: well
Caption: that would be your answer because when i
Caption: went into confluence back in the day and
Caption: i tried to create pages what i would get
Caption: is that the button there would be cut
Caption: off the bottom of the screen which meant
Caption: that i could not navigate to it which
Caption: meant that i could not create pages
Caption: oops
Caption: so
Caption: you can actually scroll the options
Caption: within the confluence pop-up and
Caption: atlassian have done a bit of work in
Caption: fixing this since but
Caption: what this essentially meant at the time
Caption: was that if you were using a magnified
Caption: screen for particular configurations
Caption: because you couldn't scroll the whole
Caption: screen to see the whole pop-up you just
Caption: wouldn't be able to create pages at all
Caption: or you would have to learn how to tab
Caption: navigate your way around blind without
Caption: screen reader cues to be able to do it
Caption: and that pretty much meant that that was
Caption: a piece of work that i just offloaded
Caption: onto my colleagues every time i needed
Caption: to create a page i called someone over
Caption: and i went hey can you come do this for
Caption: me please
Caption: so how do we improve it well you want to
Caption: make sure that your ui elements are all
Caption: scrollable and that nothing is cut off
Caption: by the bottom of the screen so you want
Caption: to set it up so that it's not just you
Caption: know scrolling the options within the
Caption: pop-up but the whole page there is
Caption: scrollable
Caption: you want to make sure that you test your
Caption: pop-up windows for accessibility so
Caption: looking at things like do they block out
Caption: other elements of the user interface if
Caption: someone is using a zoomed in screen or a
Caption: screen reader can they actually navigate
Caption: their way around this pop-up window
Caption: without losing focus without things
Caption: being cut off the bottom of the screen
Caption: and the best way to deal with it is you
Caption: zoom it up yourself or you
Caption: find a visually impaired person you get
Caption: them to test it for you and that will
Caption: very quickly show you where a lot of
Caption: those issues are going to be
Caption: i need a human screen reader
Caption: now i was not the person who said this
Caption: the person who said i need a human
Caption: screen reader was my friend's
Caption: grandmother
Caption: she is unfortunately now deceased she
Caption: was a lovely person
Caption: and later on in life due to a
Caption: degenerative disease she became blind
Caption: now she was quite religious and she used
Caption: the patheos website which built itself
Caption: as hosting the conversation on faith to
Caption: keep in touch with her religious
Caption: community when she was no longer able to
Caption: easily go to church
Caption: and when she started using pathos many
Caption: many years ago
Caption: it looked like this
Caption: and visually that site is not too bad it
Caption: was also not all that bad to navigate
Caption: with a screen reader it wasn't perfect
Caption: but you could see where things were you
Caption: could relatively easily navigate your
Caption: way around most of it
Caption: and it was fairly apparent what was
Caption: going on where they also designed it in
Caption: such a way that you didn't have auto
Caption: playing videos and cluttered pop-ups
Caption: which would come up and block your view
Caption: of part of the page
Caption: until in late 2017 early 2018 patheos
Caption: went through a redesign and at the end
Caption: of the redesign their website looked
Caption: like this
Caption: and i can't show you the accessibility
Caption: issues with their website
Caption: because some of the problems that they
Caption: had were so bad that at the time i was
Caption: originally putting this talk together a
Caption: lot of the major browsers released a
Caption: feature that blocked a lot of these
Caption: obnoxious pop-ups on site that the
Caption: beginning of that text there
Caption: advertisement
Caption: i wasn't using an ad blocker when i did
Caption: this that was just blocked but back in
Caption: the day when my friend's grandmother was
Caption: trying to use this website
Caption: what would happen was she would tap
Caption: around and suddenly she would find
Caption: herself in an ad pop-up or there would
Caption: be auto-playing videos that were talking
Caption: over her screen reader which meant that
Caption: she couldn't hear the cues that she
Caption: needed to navigate around the website
Caption: and that made her feel something like
Caption: this
Caption: she was not happy she was not very
Caption: pleased and she no longer used the
Caption: pathos website
Caption: if you want an example of this closer to
Caption: home kohl's the
Caption: big supermarket chain
Caption: got sued by a screen reader user because
Caption: of their
Caption: website for online ordering was not
Caption: accessible with a screen reader
Caption: and coles ended up settling that lawsuit
Caption: and one of the stipulations of the
Caption: settlement was that coles actually had
Caption: to make sure that their online website
Caption: was accessible to screen reader users
Caption: so if you want to have a look at someone
Caption: who does this really well causes it and
Caption: that's because now they know they have
Caption: to do it
Caption: oops
Caption: so
Caption: the sound on autoplaying videos talks
Caption: over screen readers and when you think
Caption: about the fact that screen readers are
Caption: providing auditory cues
Caption: to help you with the visual cues that
Caption: you miss if you're vision impaired that
Caption: can be quite a big problem but the
Caption: bigger problem is that if you can't see
Caption: the video on the page you're relying on
Caption: being able to hear the screen reader's
Caption: triggers that will tell you how to close
Caption: it if the video is talking over the
Caption: screen reader that's not something that
Caption: you're going to be able to do
Caption: and what's even worse is that some of
Caption: these pop-up advertisements and auto
Caption: playing videos will actually take screen
Caption: readers into an entirely new container
Caption: which acts as a new page and then you
Caption: just get a bunch of triggers that go
Caption: image image image item text
Caption: and so on and so forth looping around
Caption: and if you are a screen reader user
Caption: expecting to see a whole page and you
Caption: don't know what's happened that can be
Caption: really confusing
Caption: to make matters worse not all pop-ups
Caption: and auto-playing videos have a dismiss
Caption: button that will even work if you don't
Caption: have a mouse there are some scenarios in
Caption: which you set up your whole page and you
Caption: go through and you try and make sure
Caption: that you can actually close things and
Caption: you find that that close trigger or that
Caption: dismiss trigger just isn't visible if
Caption: you're navigating via keyboard it's not
Caption: correctly placed and that can be a
Caption: really big problem
Caption: so how do we improve it well it's pretty
Caption: good design just let people decide
Caption: whether they want to play videos auto
Caption: playing videos are really annoying and
Caption: it is even more important to let users
Caption: decide because of the accessibility
Caption: implications of this
Caption: you also want to make it easy for
Caption: keyboard navigators and screen reader
Caption: users to ignore or close those pop-up
Caption: elements so make sure that the dismiss
Caption: trigger is easily visible to a screen
Caption: reader make sure that it's very early on
Caption: make sure that it's placed in the sort
Caption: of location that they would think it
Caption: would be
Caption: now safari has a reader mode a lot of
Caption: other browsers have reader mode
Caption: extensions there's even one you can get
Caption: for the cli which i probably need to go
Caption: back and add to the sources at some
Caption: point
Caption: but what reader mode essentially does is
Caption: it strips out everything on the website
Caption: except for the text and the images
Caption: and that can be a really useful fallback
Caption: for blind or visually impaired people
Caption: because the screen reader is then going
Caption: to be able to readily navigate around it
Caption: so do check to make sure that your html
Caption: is properly formatted check to make sure
Caption: that reader mode works the way that you
Caption: would expect it to
Caption: and then put on a blindfold cover your
Caption: screen use a screen reader yourself it's
Caption: not going to be as good as getting
Caption: people who use it day to day but you
Caption: will very quickly pick up on what the
Caption: issues might be when you do a direct
Caption: comparison of what the screen reader
Caption: gives you
Caption: to what you actually get
Caption: when you look at it visually
Caption: does anyone here remember geocities
Caption: cool yeah we have an audience of people
Caption: that remember geocities
Caption: for those of you who don't geocity's
Caption: websites tended to look something like
Caption: this this is admittedly one of the less
Caption: obnoxious options that i could have
Caption: picked but it's still very emblematic of
Caption: what web design in that sort of era was
Caption: like we've got the word out we've got
Caption: the dancing penguin we've got a bunch of
Caption: clashing colors we've got broken links
Caption: we've got a whole lot of text in
Caption: different colors in thai um all that
Caption: we're really missing is you know the
Caption: line of rainbow kirby's jumping across
Caption: the top and then it would be very much a
Caption: geocities website
Caption: geocities is dead
Caption: yahoo bought it and they killed it off
Caption: in march of 2019.
Caption: fortunately or unfortunately depending
Caption: on how you look at it a lot of the
Caption: people who came into uh web design in
Caption: the era where geocities were state of
Caption: the art
Caption: now actually have quite a lot of
Caption: creative control over their own websites
Caption: and many of them have incorporated some
Caption: of these elements of the geocities era
Caption: into their corporate websites which is
Caption: essentially the equivalent of taking
Caption: your very productive businesses fancy
Caption: corporate website we are very amazing
Caption: and we will show you why
Caption: and putting a nyan cat across the top of
Caption: it which is not something that i'm going
Caption: to recommend unless whatever your
Caption: business is is very very niche
Caption: i have a friend who has photosensitive
Caption: epilepsy and she works in the it
Caption: industry
Caption: several years ago she had an encounter
Caption: with one of these enterprising designers
Caption: from the geo cities era
Caption: she heard about this particular tech
Caption: company and she wanted to see what they
Caption: were all about and so she went to their
Caption: website
Caption: and what she encountered there was a
Caption: giant strobing pink element that took up
Caption: the top two thirds of her screen
Caption: which pretty much immediately caused her
Caption: to have a seizure and the end result of
Caption: that was that the enterprising designer
Caption: had a phone call which i really
Caption: suspected he probably didn't want to be
Caption: on the other end of
Caption: oops
Caption: so
Caption: flashing flickering and strobing effects
Caption: are one of the major causes of seizures
Caption: and if you're a video game player and
Caption: you get games in physical boxes if you
Caption: flip over to the back of the game quite
Caption: often they have that little bit of text
Caption: there that says hey
Caption: there's a flashing flickering and
Caption: strobing warning here if you're photo
Caption: photosensitive you want to be careful
Caption: about playing this that's what that is
Caption: for
Caption: and it's much more severe generally if
Caption: you're looking at saturated reds pinks
Caption: oranges and really high contrast effects
Caption: so if you're strobing something from
Caption: pink to white or red to white that's
Caption: going to be much more of a problem than
Caption: a tiny little animation in the corner
Caption: that's going dark blue to dark green
Caption: particularly because photosensitive
Caption: epilepsy is a spectrum from mild to
Caption: severe
Caption: at the milder end it's quite easy to
Caption: work out but my friend being one of the
Caption: more severe cases runs into this
Caption: more often than she should and so you've
Caption: got to be aware then of what the
Caption: parameters are that you're dealing with
Caption: so how do we improve it well
Caption: to begin with if you can you want to
Caption: avoid using those flashing flickering
Caption: and strobing effects
Caption: if you do need to use them the two
Caption: changes that you want to make are you
Caption: want to make sure that they are low
Caption: contrast and you want to make sure that
Caption: they're as small as possible that
Caption: flashing from dark blue to dark green in
Caption: the corner is not going to be nearly as
Caption: much of a problem as the giant strobing
Caption: pink element that takes up the top two
Caption: thirds of your page
Caption: and if you can avoid it don't use
Caption: particularly saturated reds and pinks
Caption: and also sometimes oranges for those
Caption: sorts of flashing effects
Caption: if you really want to do this well and
Caption: you have a website where you absolutely
Caption: have to have animation on it give users
Caption: the option to disable and enable it at
Caption: will that's the sort of thing that's
Caption: really useful for scenarios like ling's
Caption: cars because it means that if you have
Caption: people who have those sorts of photo
Caption: sensitivity issues they can still
Caption: actually access your website even if
Caption: it's not quite in the way that you might
Caption: have intended
Caption: now there is actually a certain amount
Caption: of precedent for disabled people being
Caption: involved in integrated sports and that
Caption: can be everything from kids playing in
Caption: the schoolyard to olympic champions like
Caption: rato ildico the hungarian fencer and im
Caption: dong hyun the korean archer
Caption: but for this specific case study i want
Caption: to look at a more modern version of
Caption: sports we're going to look at esports
Caption: specifically league of legends
Caption: this is for those of you who are not
Caption: into video games pretty much a
Caption: computerized tower defense you have
Caption: teams of five people and they're trying
Caption: to defend a tower
Caption: each of the people on those five teams
Caption: can pick characters or champions that
Caption: have different abilities and league of
Caption: legends has a really thriving
Caption: professional scene you can actually make
Caption: a decent living playing league of
Caption: legends professionally if you're very
Caption: good at it
Caption: several years ago the creators of league
Caption: of legends introduced a new champion
Caption: called tom kench and this is the titular
Caption: catfish you can see there redfish on the
Caption: left and green fish on the right
Caption: tom kench had a mechanic that no other
Caption: character in the game had had before and
Caption: that mechanic is called grey health and
Caption: this is where we find out how many
Caption: colorblind people are in the audience
Caption: today because for those of you who are
Caption: not color blind if you have a look at
Caption: that on the red side you can see that
Caption: there's a chunk of the health bar that's
Caption: red then there's a big chunk of the
Caption: health bar that's gray and that's
Caption: essentially acting as a shield which
Caption: means that at this point tom kench is
Caption: unkillable
Caption: and then on the right hand side you've
Caption: got that little bit which is kind of
Caption: shaded out red and that's the health
Caption: that he's lost
Caption: but if i put a color blindness filter
Caption: over that particularly on the left side
Caption: the red side which is the enemy side
Caption: that's suddenly not so clear
Caption: and given that somewhere between eight
Caption: and ten percent of the population mostly
Caption: men are colorblind it was inevitable
Caption: that when with teams of five you are
Caption: eventually going to have a tweet like
Caption: this from a professional player
Caption: if you didn't know i'm colorblind along
Caption: with two other members of my team all
Caption: three of us can't see what health he's
Caption: at in colorblind mode he being tom
Caption: kenchia
Caption: again these are professional players
Caption: this is something that they need to be
Caption: able to do to do their job
Caption: oops
Caption: so most colorblind people can't tell the
Caption: difference between red and green but as
Caption: you can see there from the colorblind
Caption: filter the other crucial bit of
Caption: information here is the contrast between
Caption: colors if you can't distinguish the
Caption: difference between particular colors
Caption: you're going to use that contrast to see
Caption: is this what i think it is or is it not
Caption: because what you basically get with
Caption: colors that color blind people can't see
Caption: is they'll generally look some variation
Caption: of gray black brown or black or they'll
Caption: be ambiguous
Caption: and the way that we improve this to
Caption: start with
Caption: is by using a contrast checker to make
Caption: sure that elements are going to be
Caption: viewable
Caption: to people with all different types of
Caption: color blindness and i'm not just talking
Caption: about red and green color blindness here
Caption: which are the most common types you also
Caption: need to design for blue color blindness
Caption: and people with no color vision at all
Caption: slack does this really well slack for
Caption: many years has had accessibility themes
Caption: for protonopia and deuteronopia so red
Caption: green color blindness but also for
Caption: trisha nopia which is blue github is
Caption: another one that more recently has done
Caption: that very well
Caption: and even if you have a colorblind mode
Caption: particularly if you're just designing
Caption: for red and green color blindness try
Caption: putting a filter over get people to test
Caption: it and make sure that it actually does
Caption: what you think it would do
Caption: riot games the creators of league of
Caption: legends to their credit did actually fix
Caption: this quite quickly when it came to their
Caption: attention but it's that sort of user
Caption: acceptance testing that can often pick
Caption: up those issues before they get to
Caption: production
Caption: and if you're building a colorblind mode
Caption: for something you want to try and make
Caption: sure that you're using meaningful icons
Caption: or meaningful information to indicate
Caption: different elements and states not just
Caption: color if what you're getting is you know
Caption: we're using a square a circle and a
Caption: rectangle to try to tell the difference
Caption: between these things that's not much
Caption: better whereas if you've got a great big
Caption: tick
Caption: it's going to be apparent what it means
Caption: whether it's green or not
Caption: it's 2020 round three and i can't
Caption: believe i'm saying this
Caption: but if we cast our mind back a few years
Caption: to 2020 round one
Caption: before the whole covered pandemic thing
Caption: happened you might remember i certainly
Caption: do in melbourne we had pretty extensive
Caption: bushfires which blanketed quite a lot of
Caption: the country in smoke
Caption: and through bushfires and through the
Caption: covert 19 pandemic a lot of people
Caption: became aware of different aspects of
Caption: accessibility that they hadn't been
Caption: aware of before and one of these was
Caption: sign language interpreters because every
Caption: time we had the prime minister or a
Caption: premier or a chief health officer or
Caption: someone from the emergency services
Caption: coming onto our televisions giving
Caption: broadcasts there was always an
Caption: australian sign language interpreter
Caption: next to them and that was to ensure that
Caption: for people where sign language is their
Caption: first language they were able to get
Caption: that information conveyed to them in a
Caption: timely manner in case they needed to
Caption: evacuate or to make sure that they knew
Caption: what health orders were changing
Caption: but sign language interpretation is not
Caption: the only way to make things accessible
Caption: to people who are deaf or hard of
Caption: hearing
Caption: you also want to look at things like
Caption: captions and a lot of people will do
Caption: that using automated captioning
Caption: solutions
Caption: which can be great until they're not as
Caption: illustrated by this tweet from cal
Caption: montgomery a disability activist beta
Caption: based out of the u.s
Caption: if you value us equally and want us to
Caption: participate fully we need full access to
Caption: the pulsate briefing with enough lead
Caption: time to absorb it
Caption: that chance is gone for this year which
Caption: means that you have just sabotaged your
Caption: own legislative agenda by leaving
Caption: advocates unprepared
Caption: now cal here was referring to one of the
Caption: biggest disability organizations in the
Caption: us
Caption: who had run an event the pulsate
Caption: briefing and if you're wondering what
Caption: paul say means that's how the automated
Caption: captioning solution that they said was
Caption: adequate for people to access that
Caption: briefing rendered the term policy
Caption: the rest of the the rest of the
Caption: transcript of the briefing was similarly
Caption: garbled
Caption: now that's actually not that hard to
Caption: solve it just requires a bit of human
Caption: review afterwards and one group of
Caption: people that do this really well are the
Caption: podcasts this american life which is
Caption: backed by national public radio in the
Caption: us
Caption: they do have a note on their website
Caption: that says this american life is produced
Caption: for the year and designed to be heard
Caption: but they produce transcripts which are
Caption: run through an automated transcription
Caption: engine and then corrected manually by
Caption: human captioners and what that means is
Caption: that if you are deaf if you are hard of
Caption: hearing or if you have auditory
Caption: processing issues or for any other
Caption: reason are text reliant you can go
Caption: through and read through that transcript
Caption: and it will provide you with all of the
Caption: information
Caption: one group of people that don't do this
Caption: quite so well are guardian australia and
Caption: this is relevant because they produced
Caption: one of the best sources of information
Caption: in audio form about what was actually
Caption: going on in terms of health roundups and
Caption: things during the covert 19 pandemic
Caption: but their approach to transcribing
Caption: things can be described with this
Caption: headline here guardian podcasts
Caption: why no transcripts that is to say that
Caption: their approach is to not transcribe
Caption: anything at all
Caption: which means that if you are
Caption: deaf or hard of hearing or otherwise
Caption: text reliant you cannot actually access
Caption: any of the material that guardian
Caption: australia produces in audio form
Caption: oops
Caption: and this is also important because text
Caption: reliant people aren't necessarily deaf
Caption: or hard of hearing autistic people
Caption: people with adhd people with sensory
Caption: processing disorders people who are on a
Caption: busy train and want to be able to read
Caption: information rather than listening to it
Caption: people with disorders like tinnitus
Caption: which affect the hearing in situational
Caption: manners
Caption: are all going to find themselves text
Caption: reliant at some point or another even if
Caption: it's not all the time
Caption: so how do we improve it
Caption: you want to provide transcripts for any
Caption: spoken audio on your website and you
Caption: want to make sure that you caption any
Caption: videos but do bear in mind that
Caption: automated transcription software is not
Caption: a complete solution if you get a human
Caption: to correct the transcription before it's
Caption: published you're going to produce
Caption: something that people can actually
Caption: access
Caption: and the captions which were done by
Caption: netflix for stranger things sort of made
Caption: their way around the internet multiple
Caption: times because they did a lot of other
Caption: things really well in terms of
Caption: describing changes in vocal tone and
Caption: background noise if you're producing
Caption: particularly video content or complex
Caption: video content that's really important
Caption: acting in artificial pancreas now that
Caption: can be read in two different ways we can
Caption: talk about hacking together an
Caption: artificial pancreas or we can talk about
Caption: hacking into an artificial pancreas but
Caption: this case study actually covers both
Caption: this is a medtronic mini-med insulin
Caption: pump it is used by people who are
Caption: insulin-dependent with diabetes
Caption: basically the pump sits just under your
Caption: skin you plug it in and it delivers
Caption: insulin at regular
Caption: intervals without you having to inject
Caption: yourself that's really good for a lot of
Caption: people
Caption: there's also been another recent
Caption: invention of the constant blood glucose
Caption: monitor and that again similarly sits
Caption: just below your skin provides
Caption: information on what your blood glucose
Caption: is all the time and
Caption: these medtronic mini-med insulin pumps
Caption: had a really interesting security floor
Caption: which resulted in a lot of people with
Caption: diabetes hunting them down because what
Caption: you could do
Caption: is there was an unsecured radio
Caption: frequency which was used by the remote
Caption: but you could also hook that up with a
Caption: bridge between it and a little bit of
Caption: open source source code
Caption: to a constant blood glucose monitor and
Caption: have the insulin pump react and deliver
Caption: insulin at various intervals based on
Caption: that
Caption: but the problem is
Caption: that security flaws always come with
Caption: other issues and the fact that you could
Caption: hook in via this piece of source code
Caption: also meant that your medtronic mini-made
Caption: insulin pump was potentially vulnerable
Caption: to hacker attacks
Caption: which is not great because that allows
Caption: you to actually modify the amount of
Caption: insulin that you give to someone
Caption: so the fda the drug regulator in the us
Caption: were made aware of this and they went
Caption: away and issued an alert on it
Caption: but there were a few enterprising hacker
Caption: types in the healthcare industry who
Caption: didn't think that they were taking this
Caption: very seriously
Caption: so they got out their phones and they
Caption: did a little bit of coding and they
Caption: produced an android app which you could
Caption: use to hook into that really common
Caption: frequency on any megatronic mini-made
Caption: insulin pump in the immediate vicinity
Caption: and either entirely withhold insulin
Caption: from its user or deliver a lethal dose
Caption: of insulin immediately
Caption: which finally resulted in medtronic
Caption: recalling their vulnerable mini-med
Caption: insulin pumps
Caption: oh dear
Caption: and this is where we get into the fact
Caption: that accessibility is not just about web
Caption: accessibility in some scenarios security
Caption: issues and many other types of issues
Caption: can actually be accessibility problems
Caption: medical devices you're dealing with
Caption: people's lives it's really important and
Caption: what's more problematic is that if
Caption: you're regulated by an external
Caption: organization like the fda you may not
Caption: hear about these issues quickly in some
Caption: scenarios you may not actually hear
Caption: about them at all
Caption: so how do we improve this
Caption: you want to start by considering the
Caption: possible attack factors a lot of this is
Caption: just good basic security get a good pen
Caption: testing company in particularly hardware
Caption: pen testers for stuff like medical
Caption: devices before your device goes to
Caption: market
Caption: and make sure that if people notify you
Caption: about security vulnerabilities you
Caption: respond promptly
Caption: because the really sad thing about this
Caption: use case is that unintended users can
Caption: actually be a business opportunity and
Caption: medtronic weren't the ones that ended up
Caption: capitalizing on it
Caption: there were a couple of different
Caption: companies who saw these issues and
Caption: produced secure insulin pumps which were
Caption: set up properly which you could use to
Caption: hook into derivatives of that original
Caption: source code on a secure channel to
Caption: produce your closed loop insulin
Caption: delivery system
Caption: and this is where we get to my favorite
Caption: case study of the bunch because this is
Caption: another one that concerns me
Caption: i have been giving this talk since 2019
Caption: and when i realized that i was going to
Caption: be talking to people a lot about
Caption: accessibility when i became an
Caption: accidental accessibility advocate
Caption: i went okay i've got to find some way of
Caption: making sure that i know about what is
Caption: going on in the accessibility world and
Caption: one way that i did that was through my
Caption: linkedin feed
Caption: so i was looking a lot of information
Caption: about accessibility i was following the
Caption: accessibility hashtag and one day i was
Caption: going through my linkedin feed and a
Caption: post popped up saying there's an
Caption: accessibility consultant that's giving a
Caption: talk about accessibility on this date at
Caption: this time at this venue
Caption: and i went great cool
Caption: i know some things about accessibility i
Caption: know quite a lot about the things that
Caption: are directly applicable to me as well as
Caption: more about the things that are
Caption: applicable to my friends people that i
Caption: know
Caption: but there's always something that you
Caption: can learn from scenarios like this
Caption: so i go along i get off work at 4 30 i
Caption: take the train to the venue
Caption: to see this
Caption: that's a set of stairs
Caption: but that wasn't the only set of stairs
Caption: to get into the building there were in
Caption: fact three similar sets of stairs that
Caption: one and two more after the glass door to
Caption: get to the lift which would then take
Caption: you up to where the event was being held
Caption: and i described this to a couple of
Caption: friends of mine as being like a roomba
Caption: just sitting at the bottom of a set of
Caption: stairs repeatedly shouting error 406
Caption: which for those of you who are not well
Caption: versed in html error codes means not
Caption: acceptable
Caption: so i get up there i listened to the
Caption: whole talk and i had basically crawled
Caption: up i i basically crawled up the last
Caption: flight of stairs to get there
Caption: and i said to the accessibility
Caption: consultant does it strike you as ironic
Caption: that you're giving a talk about web
Caption: accessibility in a venue that's
Caption: inaccessible and he looks at me and he
Caption: goes
Caption: you know i hadn't really thought about
Caption: that
Caption: and i don't think that i need to explain
Caption: the irony here but we're going to do the
Caption: post-mortem anyway
Caption: so if you're running events and full
Caption: credit to ddd perk here because they've
Caption: done a brilliant job of this you want to
Caption: make sure that your venues are
Caption: wheelchair accessible you want to make
Caption: sure that they have disabled bathrooms
Caption: so many times i have gone to events to
Caption: find that the disabled bathrooms are on
Caption: a different floor or they're locked or
Caption: no one knows where they are or you've
Caption: got to go and talk to security to
Caption: actually get the key
Caption: but there are more advanced types of
Caption: things that you can do which help people
Caption: with a variety of different disabilities
Caption: so you want to look at things like
Caption: providing quiet spaces for people which
Caption: again is something that ddd perth has
Caption: done
Caption: and making sure that there is a lot of
Caption: different adaptive technology around so
Caption: sign language interpreters if you've got
Caption: hearing loops
Caption: one of my friends has been hard of
Caption: hearing basically her whole life went
Caption: and got fitted with a hearing aid
Caption: in her 40s and she called me up and she
Caption: said dawn i am so happy because for the
Caption: first time i can hear the announcements
Caption: at the train station when i turn on my
Caption: hearing aid and i plug it into the
Caption: hearing loop
Caption: and things like you know audio
Caption: descriptions of slides you'll see as i
Caption: go through this talk i've tried to
Caption: describe everything that's on the slides
Caption: as i go but what's really important here
Caption: is making sure that you include people
Caption: with disabilities in discussions about
Caption: accessibility
Caption: and if you don't know whether people
Caption: with disabilities are the question that
Caption: you need to ask yourself and again this
Caption: is not just applicable to disability is
Caption: who's not in the room and why aren't
Caption: they here because sometimes the reason
Caption: why they aren't here is going to be as
Caption: simple as three flights of stairs into
Caption: the venue
Caption: so to recap
Caption: accessibility benefits everyone not just
Caption: disabled people
Caption: and you can do this really well by
Caption: building accessibility into your design
Caption: principles from the start
Caption: but it's not just about the web
Caption: accessibility piece other issues like
Caption: security risks can also be accessibility
Caption: issues you need to make an
Caption: individualized assessment based on what
Caption: it is that you're trying to do
Caption: excuse me my slides are stuffing up
Caption: again
Caption: thorough testing is really important and
Caption: the best case scenario is that you can
Caption: get adaptive technology users to test
Caption: your software themselves but if you
Caption: can't think about the things that
Caption: disabled people might need to do
Caption: differently
Caption: and most importantly
Caption: regardless of whether they have
Caption: accessibility needs or not listen to
Caption: your users
Caption: i do want to give a couple of thanks to
Caption: melissa who did my former colleague who
Caption: did the fancy corporate website mockups
Caption: for me matt for the atlassian console
Caption: screenshots and my friend annie who
Caption: produced the accessibility room by
Caption: drawing
Caption: we're not going to have time for
Caption: questions i'll be around i have coloured
Caption: hair i'm not hard to find
Caption: come find me
Caption: my email is up there there's also a link
Caption: there to github repo which has all of
Caption: the talks that i've previously done and
Caption: i've done a million different talks on
Caption: accessibility but it was amazing to be
Caption: here to do this in person for a group of
Caption: people for the first time and thank you
Caption: all so much
Caption: for coming on this journey with me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: first
Caption: foreign
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our poses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone too
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: let's go
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep and i
Caption: think our customers are going to love it
Caption: i got a real app now folks
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our puzzles
Caption: this is like my dream come true i've
Caption: always wanted to join scott handsome
Caption: do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering it
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years
Caption: people have trusted us to turn ambitious
Caption: projects into meaningful outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and i think that when they see when they
Caption: see the cereal box they say okay that's
Caption: carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge maths nerd
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stop
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am
Caption: cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: pink beret
Caption: as you can tell by the accent i am
Caption: french very very prominent accent
Caption: so the direct completely makes sense as
Caption: for the ping no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a pink background with
Caption: hello kitty riding a unicorn
Caption: it does not reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of
Caption: sparks and and joy and so yeah so being
Caption: better it is
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet when people ask me how to
Caption: pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong
Caption: work to inspire is very something that
Caption: we live by i believe we definitely see
Caption: how much passion we are for quality and
Caption: how much we want to convey this as a
Caption: client we don't just go for
Caption: target we always try to go a little bit
Caption: further and we try to inspire each other
Caption: by learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring we better build
Caption: better personally i always try to be
Caption: better than yesterday
Caption: that's always been me
Caption: so i'm better than yesterday and i'll be
Caption: better tomorrow but i also get a lot of
Caption: training opportunities and planning
Caption: because there's a vast
Caption: library of training courses available
Caption: that i can just access anything before i
Caption: join planet like when you want to learn
Caption: something google first right and then
Caption: when you google something you always
Caption: have to pay for something and that's not
Caption: that's not what i want to do so it's
Caption: really it's really good that planet
Caption: offers these free courses for me and i
Caption: don't have to feel pressured about
Caption: buying something just so i can improve
Caption: my skills and use them for work
Caption: planet always encourages learning and
Caption: learning is a good way to just
Caption: accelerate your career growth top note
Caption: of testing is um
Caption: it's awesome
Caption: it's it's really cool to be around
Caption: people who are so passionate so driven
Caption: to do what they do
Caption: and who always want to
Caption: want to learn and get better
Caption: i think that's really important and i
Caption: think it's going to be a driving factor
Caption: going forward in in the it industry in
Caption: general
Caption: top one is the best of the best and for
Caption: me it's
Caption: if you want to grow up in your carrier
Caption: you are at the right place because we
Caption: have got all the training materials
Caption: right people and right opportunities
Caption: yeah whatever you need to progress in
Caption: your career you have got everything in
Caption: here
Caption: to boost your experience and
Caption: boost your personality everything
Caption: in a compact pack that's what planet is
Caption: for me
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hi
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our puppies
Caption: this is like my dream come true i've
Caption: always wanted to join scott held
Caption: someone's
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: tell me the best thing that's happened
Caption: while i was gone i made your dad ate
Caption: healthy like you said he even tried the
Caption: broccoli eat it
Caption: then i helped him make his work much
Caption: better
Caption: and we found the perfect outfit to wear
Caption: to my party
Caption: but i really needed to wind down before
Caption: bed so i turned my hand into a starfish
Caption: my best friend is you being back
Caption: [Music]
Caption: by applying market leading technology
Caption: solutions through our lifecycle services
Caption: we help clients realize business
Caption: outcomes through our advice integration
Caption: and operational services
Caption: moq digital helps clients to fully
Caption: understand their it needs adopt the
Caption: right solution and provide ongoing
Caption: support to maximize their investment
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: hello hello um hope everyone's feeling
Caption: fed and watered and coffeed and fruit
Caption: and all the rest that was out there it
Caption: was a good morning tea um delighted to
Caption: introduce you guys to haley hayley
Caption: stewart she's going to talk to us today
Caption: but first let me give you a bit of her
Caption: background haley is a developer and
Caption: educator and has been teaching others to
Caption: code for as long as she's been coding
Caption: herself
Caption: she's a firm believer that anyone can
Caption: learn to code and proves it by
Caption: dedicating a lot of her working and
Caption: personal life to helping improve
Caption: diversity in the tech industry
Caption: she has extensive experience in writing
Caption: resources and teaching workshops about
Caption: computer science and programming for all
Caption: ages and experience levels
Caption: haley currently works at enverto where
Caption: she trains apprentice developers and
Caption: prepares them for joining their first
Caption: team as a fully fledged developer so if
Caption: our friends here would like to take
Caption: their seats i will hand over to you
Caption: hayley take it away
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: okay
Caption: good morning everybody hi mai atamariere
Caption: kia ora koto so that's welcome good
Caption: morning hello my name is hayley i'm an
Caption: fyi my pronouns are she her and today
Caption: i'm going to be speaking on the topic of
Caption: paying forward so if you didn't read the
Caption: blurb and you just thought oh what a
Caption: cool title i'll go to this one or i'm
Caption: standing next to this room i'll just
Caption: walk in
Caption: today i am going to be presenting on how
Caption: do you continue to progress and develop
Caption: and upskill in your own career while at
Caption: the same time dedicating time to helping
Caption: others do the same who may be at a lower
Caption: experience level than yourselves
Caption: because this is what i've been doing for
Caption: most of my career so i'm going to go
Caption: into that um in a moment but before we
Caption: do go any further
Caption: i would really like for us to just pause
Caption: and to acknowledge the traditional
Caption: custodians on the land which we are
Caption: gathered on today so today in this room
Caption: we're standing on woodjack no budget and
Caption: i want to extend that respect to any
Caption: aboriginal and torres strait islander
Caption: peoples here and online today and pay my
Caption: respects to their elders past and prison
Caption: the hundreds of indigenous groups who
Caption: continue to exist in this land have
Caption: never ceded their sovereignty
Caption: and i want to acknowledge not just that
Caption: i happen to be standing on wajok land
Caption: but that we are all standing on
Caption: indigenous land
Caption: but you can probably hear in my accent
Caption: that i did not grow up here
Caption: i'm from the manawatu back home in
Caption: aotearoa so i'd also like to acknowledge
Caption: the heritage of the land in which i grow
Caption: up and pay respects to the ewe that have
Caption: lived and do still live on that land and
Caption: i encourage you to just take this moment
Caption: to also consider the people of the
Caption: culture
Caption: and the culture of the land that you
Caption: grew up on also
Caption: i'd also love to give a shout out to all
Caption: of our sponsors
Caption: and also they're not on the slide but
Caption: i'm also going to give a shout out to
Caption: she codes who are running a coding
Caption: workshop today
Caption: so if you have a moment i totally
Caption: encourage you to drop in and see what's
Caption: going on there because it should be lots
Caption: of fun
Caption: but what are we talking about today in
Caption: this room
Caption: so
Caption: i want to talk to you a little bit about
Caption: my career journey because it's not
Caption: probably the most typical career journey
Caption: you'd take um to become a developer
Caption: and then from there we're going to go
Caption: into how did all the teaching and
Caption: mentoring that i've done helped me to
Caption: become a better developer
Caption: and from that what are the tips and
Caption: tricks that i've learned to help you
Caption: become an effective teacher or mentor
Caption: while you're also working as a dev or
Caption: just in tech in general and how does all
Caption: of this come together to help us improve
Caption: the diversity
Caption: in our industry
Caption: so let me tell you a little bit about my
Caption: career and where i am today
Caption: so
Caption: uh at the moment i am a senior engineer
Caption: and developer mentor at envato
Caption: has anybody heard of envato
Caption: yeah we've got shocking brand
Caption: recognition recognition we're trying to
Caption: do something about it but basically we
Caption: sell
Caption: uh well we provide uh stock footage or
Caption: photos or fonts or presentations we
Caption: basically create and sell creative stock
Caption: so even if you haven't heard of us you
Caption: have definitely seen us
Caption: being used and we support
Caption: thousands of authors around the world
Caption: who might be photographers or make
Caption: really cool animations and whatnot and
Caption: we sell via what they create on our
Caption: platforms and so far we have paid
Caption: millions and millions of dollars towards
Caption: authors and we have supported thousands
Caption: and thousands of creators
Caption: so we are big on community um which is
Caption: probably why i work there because the
Caption: values align really closely to mine but
Caption: also i work there because i have a
Caption: really cool job so i'm a developer
Caption: mentor which means that we hire
Caption: apprentice developers and they get to
Caption: spend nine months with me or another
Caption: developer mentor just training and
Caption: learning how to become a effective
Caption: developer
Caption: on a delivery team at envato and then
Caption: they get hired into a team at envaro of
Caption: their choice and then we take two new
Caption: apprentices and they get to hang out
Caption: with the developer mentor and do the
Caption: same and this program has existed at
Caption: envato for about five years now
Caption: and i just joined about six months ago
Caption: to help grow the program
Caption: so we're going to circle back to that in
Caption: a little bit
Caption: so my career journey i have been in tech
Caption: for about nine years which i think is
Caption: really impressive because i'm only 25
Caption: and so in that nine years
Caption: i have had the same goals but basically
Caption: the whole time
Caption: one of them was i wanted to feel
Caption: confident in my role as a developer i
Caption: got into tech when i was 16 and i didn't
Caption: know what i was doing and i definitely
Caption: knew that i didn't know what i was doing
Caption: and so i've spent a lot of my career
Caption: just wanting one day to feel
Caption: confident and like i do know what i'm
Caption: doing
Caption: um and i think it's only like maybe six
Caption: months ago when i joined envato that i
Caption: finally
Caption: started to actually feel confident and
Caption: that yeah i am actually a developer
Caption: but the other goal that i've had in my
Caption: career is i
Caption: want and have done a lot of work towards
Caption: helping other women to get into our
Caption: industry in technical roles in
Caption: particular
Caption: and the reason that i've had this goal
Caption: is because every time i joined a dev
Caption: team or worked at a tech company i would
Caption: love it i would have so much fun being a
Caption: developer but over time i would just get
Caption: more and more bitter about how many men
Caption: are on my team and how few women are on
Caption: the team and so i would then bounce back
Caption: to working in education so i've spent
Caption: about half of my career in education
Caption: half of my career in tech and i don't
Caption: mean that i went and got a degree in
Caption: teaching and i taught in schools that's
Caption: not what i did i've worked with
Caption: companies like she codes to just mentor
Caption: other women in tech of various ages and
Caption: not just at chico it's through various
Caption: organizations and so through that i have
Caption: mentored people who are like five years
Caption: old all the way up to people who are
Caption: very near retirement age
Caption: so i have a lot of experience in
Caption: teaching people about tech and helping
Caption: people find roles in the tech industry
Caption: but this created a bit of a different
Caption: kind of problem for me and that was i've
Caption: bounced between education and tech so
Caption: much
Caption: that i started feeling like i don't know
Caption: how to build my own technical skills
Caption: while i'm spending so much time focused
Caption: on teaching fundamentals because i've
Caption: spent so much time teaching people up
Caption: until their first role in tech and i
Caption: haven't spent any time teaching you know
Caption: devs who have been in the industry for
Caption: like 15 years that's just not what i do
Caption: and so
Caption: throughout my career i've had moments of
Caption: imposter syndrome creep in because i
Caption: think oh i've spent too long in
Caption: education and i'm starting to not
Caption: understand what my dear friends are
Caption: talking about so now i'm feeling behind
Caption: and i'd have a small panic and then i'd
Caption: go back and take but then i'd be in t
Caption: and think oh there's so many dudes here
Caption: and there's no women so then i'd go back
Caption: to education and the cycle just repeated
Caption: itself
Caption: so part of this was because i was
Caption: feeling like oh i'm spending so much
Caption: time teaching
Caption: and i'm not really spending time working
Caption: on my skills and i had this perception
Caption: that in order to become a better
Caption: engineer and in order to improve my
Caption: engineering skills i had to spend a lot
Caption: of time doing what i could engineery
Caption: things so for me that was programming
Caption: and i think this makes sense like the
Caption: more time you spend programming probably
Caption: you're going to get better at it and so
Caption: your engineering skills are going to
Caption: improve but i realize that this is quite
Caption: a narrow-minded approach to being an
Caption: engineer
Caption: and so i've adapted this over the last
Caption: few months um from my role at envato
Caption: i've realized that this is actually what
Caption: it is to improve your skills in
Caption: engineering you've got to spend a little
Caption: bit of time teaching you've got to spend
Caption: a little bit of time programming but if
Caption: ultimately if you want to really rapidly
Caption: improve your own skills you've got to
Caption: spend a lot of time programming and
Caption: teaching you can't just do one and
Caption: expect your skills to improve
Caption: and the reason that i think i've had
Caption: this realization over the last six
Caption: months is because when i was hired at
Caption: envato like i went through the interview
Caption: process to be a developer mentor but to
Caption: fit into you know their structure of um
Caption: well how do we pay you and how do we
Caption: compare you to other people that gave me
Caption: the role senior engineer and i was so
Caption: scared because i have never taken on a
Caption: role that had seen you in the front of
Caption: it before and i was thinking oh my gosh
Caption: i haven't been a div for actually that
Caption: long i don't know what i'm doing why'd
Caption: they call me a senior they're going to
Caption: find me out i'm going to be demoted i'm
Caption: going to be fine like all the imposters
Caption: just just came everywhere but as soon as
Caption: i started
Caption: i realized that my
Caption: career in education had prepared me so
Caption: well
Caption: into stepping into the role of senior
Caption: engineer and i notice it in the other
Caption: engineers that i work with and i notice
Caption: it in all the engineers i interact with
Caption: through mentoring other programs and
Caption: also through
Caption: just being on other dev teams in the
Caption: past and i've realized that the
Caption: engineers who have dedicated more of
Caption: their career towards teaching or
Caption: mentoring or generally helping somebody
Caption: else in their team are the better
Caption: engineers
Caption: which shouldn't sound too shocking but
Caption: this was quite a realization that i had
Caption: so i want to unpack this a little bit
Caption: and i want us to have a little chat
Caption: about how did teaching
Caption: actually help me to be a better
Caption: developer and therefore how can it
Caption: actually help you to be a better
Caption: developer
Caption: and i'm just going to interject here
Caption: like i said in my blib um i'm going to
Caption: use a lot of examples about engineering
Caption: but this could apply as far as i'm
Caption: concerned to anyone in any industry
Caption: doing any kind of job just my
Caption: experiences in engineering so that's
Caption: what i'm going to roll with
Caption: so how did teaching help me to be a
Caption: better dev
Caption: i have learned that you end up with a
Caption: much deeper understanding of a concept
Caption: if you are bracing yourself for someone
Caption: to ask you why
Caption: so if you know that you're going to
Caption: learn something and next week someone's
Caption: going to say oh why did you do that why
Caption: did you use that why did you put it in
Caption: that context what would you use instead
Caption: when you know that you're going to be
Caption: asked this just
Caption: absolute massive pile of questions you
Caption: end up preparing for it so when i go and
Caption: learn a new concept i don't just learn
Caption: the thing and then implement it i learn
Caption: the thing i learn what alternatives i
Caption: could use instead i learned where other
Caption: where else i could implement this thing
Caption: i learned what the trade-offs are of
Caption: this thing and then i go ahead and
Caption: actually use it and it means that the
Caption: next week when someone asks me why i did
Caption: that like i'm braced for the answer like
Caption: i know what i want to say
Caption: and that's entirely because
Caption: the more junior someone is in their
Caption: career as an engineer the harder the
Caption: questions are and the more intense the
Caption: questions are and the more they just
Caption: start to absolutely grill you
Caption: i've found with the
Caption: the more senior someone is in their
Caption: career the more if i give a confident
Caption: answer they're just gonna go yeah okay
Caption: and they just roll with it whereas the
Caption: junior's gonna be like that's not good
Caption: enough i need more and so you end up
Caption: having to understand something way
Caption: deeper than you would otherwise
Caption: hopefully this one's obvious but it
Caption: really helps with communication skills
Caption: because i cannot tell you the number of
Caption: times in my career i have taught someone
Caption: what a for-loop is
Caption: and that doesn't sound hard
Caption: but trust me i know this from experience
Caption: when you first start learning to code
Caption: for loops are like mind-blowing they are
Caption: absolutely magical i'd say 90 of the
Caption: people learning them and i'd say 50 of
Caption: the people learning them do not
Caption: understand the way that i've explained
Caption: it the first time and it doesn't matter
Caption: which way i pick to explain it they're
Caption: not going to get it they need to hear it
Caption: a few different ways
Caption: and so through the process of teaching
Caption: somebody else a particular skill you end
Caption: up explaining that same thing over and
Caption: over again but in different ways every
Caption: single time and it ends up building up
Caption: to really good practice for your
Caption: communication skills so now when i'm
Caption: working on a dev team and i try and
Caption: explain something to somebody else i
Caption: know that i'm probably going to be able
Caption: to explain it really well first time and
Caption: they're going to actually understand
Caption: what i'm saying and that's all from just
Caption: practice of teaching people who ask me
Caption: questions of why but how does that work
Caption: i don't understand it's just from
Caption: practice of dealing with that for so
Caption: long
Caption: it's also helped me in that i've learned
Caption: that i really have to walk the walk and
Caption: actually
Caption: do what i tell my apprentices or my
Caption: juniors or whoever um i have to do what
Caption: i tell them to do so i tell the
Caption: apprentices that i work at nvaru at the
Caption: moment i tell them all the time just ask
Caption: questions just ask the question if you
Caption: don't know something just ask the
Caption: question but then i found that i would
Caption: have a question and i would open our
Caption: engineering slack channel and think oh
Caption: there's 150 engineers in here i don't
Caption: want to ask the question because i'm
Caption: going to feel stupid and someone's going
Caption: to roll their eyes like why are you
Caption: asked but i just realized you know i
Caption: would tell my apprentices to post this
Caption: question so i'm just going to post the
Caption: question and no one has ever messaged me
Caption: saying lola lol that was a dumb question
Caption: like that doesn't happen what usually
Caption: happens is someone says oh i'm following
Caption: this thread because i also don't know
Caption: the answer to this question so it's
Caption: really helped me to get over my fear of
Caption: asking questions like i just do it
Caption: because i tell them to so i should
Caption: probably do the same
Caption: it's also really helped me
Caption: with imposter syndrome which is what i
Caption: mentioned at the start of my talk this
Caption: is why i feel like i finally like feel
Caption: confident as a developer
Caption: because i've had to coach so many other
Caption: people through imposter syndrome
Caption: particularly because most of my career
Caption: has been focused on helping women get
Caption: into tech in particular and we're
Caption: atrocious for imposter syndrome so
Caption: coaching other people through that so
Caption: often i finally started internalizing it
Caption: to myself and my internal monologue has
Caption: changed from oh what if they find out
Caption: i'm not really a senior and i don't know
Caption: what i'm doing to they hired me as a
Caption: senior so i must be so i'll just call
Caption: myself one of those now and so the
Caption: internal monologue it's totally
Caption: different now and imposter syndrome is
Caption: not really something that i struggle
Caption: with anymore except before this talk
Caption: when i'm starting to freak out oh what
Caption: if no one comes so thank you so much for
Caption: coming
Caption: i've also become
Caption: way more forgiving of my own knowledge
Caption: gaps
Caption: because when you first start teaching or
Caption: mentoring someone else especially if
Caption: you're doing this like if you're giving
Caption: a presentation or a workshop or
Caption: something like i feel
Caption: like your biggest fear is someone's
Caption: gonna ask me a question and i'm gonna
Caption: have to google it in front of everybody
Caption: and that's really scary because what if
Caption: you can't figure it out and then you get
Caption: all flustered but now i've learned that
Caption: actually when someone asks me
Caption: something and i don't know the answer
Caption: which realistically is most of the time
Caption: i now just go cool this is now an
Caption: exercise and learning how to google
Caption: things together so we're going to go and
Caption: do this research and see if we can
Caption: figure it out together and this
Caption: literally happened a couple weeks ago
Caption: the apprentices were so obsessed with
Caption: trying to figure out how to use this
Caption: hook and react and i haven't used react
Caption: in like 18 months so i didn't know how
Caption: to do it so we spent two hours googling
Caption: trying to implement it didn't even
Caption: figure it out in the end but i feel like
Caption: they forgot that we were trying to make
Caption: it work so it kind of ended up okay
Caption: so i've become way more forgiving of my
Caption: own knowledge gaps when they asked me
Caption: that question and i i don't know how to
Caption: do this it just became an exercise and
Caption: let's unpack this together and see if we
Caption: can work it out together
Caption: and i'm just while the slide's on i'm
Caption: going to chuck out a dangerous word
Caption: there where i feel like a lot of people
Caption: they go the other way so instead of
Caption: being scared of your knowledge gaps and
Caption: being scared of asked a question you've
Caption: got way too much confidence and that
Caption: mansplainer comes out in you so you
Caption: think i don't know the answer but i'm
Caption: not going to show them so i'm going to
Caption: talk with confidence about something
Caption: completely irrelevant and then they
Caption: won't notice which is not true and it is
Caption: not helpful
Caption: so i've become more comfortable with my
Caption: own knowledge gaps i don't think i've
Caption: been a mansplainer
Caption: but i i don't think i have or a woman's
Caption: planner if you like but i certainly
Caption: would never do it now because i'm okay
Caption: with just saying let's just google it
Caption: let's just figure this out or just i
Caption: don't know let's go with someone else
Caption: so with that in mind
Caption: i want to talk about how can you be an
Caption: effective mentor because clearly these
Caption: skills are helpful like i feel like i'm
Caption: a pretty decent engineer and it's
Caption: because i've spent so much time teaching
Caption: other people so let's unpack what do i
Caption: actually do that's made me a good
Caption: teacher and therefore helped me with
Caption: those skills um and hopefully therefore
Caption: you can go back to work and feel like
Caption: you can be a good mentor as well so
Caption: something i would like to point out
Caption: is that simply having knowledge does not
Caption: make you a good teacher
Caption: and i actually put this in the slides
Caption: because a couple weeks ago i was showing
Caption: these slides to the apprentices and i
Caption: said hey could you give me some ideas
Caption: what do you think i should mention in
Caption: here and one of them
Caption: instantly rolled her eyes in the most
Caption: dramatic fashion i have ever seen and
Caption: said oh
Caption: i hate it when you meet those engineers
Caption: and they've been in tech for like 15
Caption: years and so they think that they can
Caption: teach and they can't and clearly this
Caption: person has been burned
Caption: and
Caption: and i think we all have i think
Caption: everybody can probably think about that
Caption: person that they've interacted with who
Caption: clearly thinks they are the absolute
Caption: bee's knees because they know everything
Caption: about this one particular topic but they
Caption: could not explain it to you to save
Caption: their life but they have the confidence
Caption: to think they can so i would like to
Caption: point out that having knowledge does not
Caption: make you a good teacher
Caption: which leads me to this dumb expression
Caption: those who can't do teach this is such an
Caption: embarrassing excuse this is what i like
Caption: to say instead those who know do
Caption: those that understand
Caption: teach
Caption: it is one thing to know about a
Caption: particular concept or library or
Caption: whatever
Caption: it is another thing to have the
Caption: understanding and have the skills to
Caption: actually teach it to somebody else
Caption: these are not the same thing
Caption: and i get so angry when people say those
Caption: who can't do teach because i'm a teacher
Caption: and i know what i'm doing and i have a
Caption: pretty good understanding usually of the
Caption: things that i'm teaching because i've
Caption: got that deeper understanding because i
Caption: was prepared for that really terrifying
Caption: why did you do that question so those
Caption: who know do those who understand can
Caption: also teach
Caption: so with that in mind how do you become
Caption: an effective mentor so maybe you have
Caption: all the knowledge but how do you
Caption: actually have enough understanding to
Caption: teach that to someone else
Caption: so before we run through these skills um
Caption: i just want to point out that there are
Caption: lots of different places where
Caption: mentorship happens because after i give
Caption: a talk like this someone always comes
Caption: and asks me for an opportunity so here
Caption: they are
Caption: so at work you might have an informal or
Caption: a formal mentorship program we actually
Caption: do this at envato um and i have two
Caption: little mentees at the moment and that
Caption: comes about just because usually someone
Caption: says to their manager i'm feeling like
Caption: i'm missing skills in this particular
Caption: thing and the manager goes great well i
Caption: probably can't help you but maybe we
Caption: could find someone who can and bam
Caption: suddenly i'm getting a dm and now i have
Caption: a mentee so at the moment i'm mentoring
Caption: someone on how to speak at conferences
Caption: so give me some good feedback so i can
Caption: go back into that next mentoring session
Caption: with some confidence please and also uh
Caption: someone wants to upskill their um
Caption: their knowledge of ruby on rails and so
Caption: very different things i'm not an expert
Caption: in either of those things um but i know
Caption: how to be a good mentor so if you are at
Caption: work and there's something that you want
Caption: to learn or maybe you see someone has a
Caption: knowledge gap or maybe an em has
Caption: mentioned to you or an engineering
Caption: manager has mentioned to you hey do you
Caption: think you'll be able to help this person
Caption: with this particular thing that's an
Caption: opportunity to actually create some kind
Caption: of system around it and create some more
Caption: formalized mentoring
Caption: there's also you could pair with other
Caption: least experienced developers on your
Caption: team which i really hope that you
Caption: already do so if someone's stuck with
Caption: something you can have a pairing session
Caption: with them to work it out
Caption: onboarding new team members is the best
Caption: opportunity because someone who's brand
Caption: new to the team doesn't know what
Caption: they're doing and doesn't know all the
Caption: systems they need so this is a really
Caption: great opportunity to practice mentoring
Caption: and you could also give team
Caption: presentations so maybe you have a
Caption: company that is like lunch and learns um
Caption: or maybe you've just created a really
Caption: complicated pr so instead of just
Caption: putting the pr up and hoping for the
Caption: best maybe you could run a presentation
Caption: of actually running people through that
Caption: pr
Caption: so that's at work there's also community
Caption: opportunities to be a mentor so for
Caption: example you could speak up meetups or
Caption: conferences this feels like a good
Caption: enough example of that you can also
Caption: tutor at public coding workshops or you
Caption: could tutor or teach at things like boot
Caption: camps so off the top of my head i came
Caption: up with a list of places like that that
Caption: do that so she codes general assembly
Caption: codecamp codemaster institute i think
Caption: all of those places have opportunities
Caption: in perth to actually mentor she codes in
Caption: particular they're like literally around
Caption: the corner go and ask them when the next
Caption: workshop is because they're always
Caption: looking for mentors
Caption: can you tell i used to work there i'm
Caption: just slightly biased
Caption: so there are plenty of opportunities to
Caption: be a mentor saying i haven't had the
Caption: opportunity is
Caption: not good enough there are opportunities
Caption: all around you
Caption: so
Caption: what is your actual role as a mentor
Caption: like what is your job as a mentor
Caption: your job is to help a mentee discover
Caption: ideas and solve problems for themselves
Caption: so in other words
Caption: it's not your job to provide solutions
Caption: that's not useful your job is to help
Caption: somebody else to figure out what
Caption: problems they're actually facing and
Caption: then figure out how to solve those
Caption: problems so if you're a visual person
Caption: person
Caption: this is this is what i don't want you to
Caption: do so
Caption: sometimes someone needs help with
Caption: something maybe they've got a bug and
Caption: they can't get the code running or
Caption: whatever
Caption: you provide a solution the code is
Caption: running and you pat yourself on the back
Caption: and go sweet i solved the problem i mean
Caption: great but you actually didn't
Caption: really help anyone you solve this one
Caption: particular problem but did you give them
Caption: the skills to be able to figure out how
Caption: to solve it next time i don't think so
Caption: did you get anything out of that
Caption: interaction like did you
Caption: learn how this person learns and so how
Caption: you might better come at them with
Caption: solving a problem next time i don't
Caption: think so in general this is a really
Caption: quick fix and it helps no one in the
Caption: long run so i'm going to show you
Caption: instead a flowchart of what i used to
Caption: mentor other people and it's a little
Caption: bit intimidating but it's okay we're
Caption: going to walk through i did my best
Caption: so
Caption: this is what happens whenever someone at
Caption: work comes to me with a problem that
Caption: they would like help with so they come
Caption: to me uh they're confused about a
Caption: particular concept or task so we're
Caption: going to whoa i can do this we're going
Caption: to start up here so they come to me
Caption: confused about a particular context
Caption: concept or task
Caption: so the very first thing that i'm going
Caption: to do oh i can do this is i'm not going
Caption: to grab the laptop and start digging and
Caption: figure out what's going on i'm going to
Caption: ask them some clarifying questions
Caption: and the reason i'm going to do that is
Caption: because quite often when i'm mentoring
Caption: there's a couple of things that happen
Caption: someone might use a bunch of really
Caption: fancy terminology but it turns out that
Caption: they actually don't know what those
Caption: words meant and it's impressive that
Caption: they managed to get the sentence
Caption: together it would be really easy to fall
Caption: for that and think that that means that
Caption: they know what they're talking about and
Caption: i'm not trying to shame the person in
Caption: this situation because great they used a
Caption: bunch of really cool terminology what
Caption: i'm trying to figure out is how far back
Caption: do i need to go to actually explain
Caption: things so if they've picked up a word
Caption: but they've used it in their own context
Caption: you need to help them with that you need
Caption: to solve that so they don't do that
Caption: again
Caption: or the other thing that can happen is
Caption: someone has the concept figured out but
Caption: they don't have the words to describe it
Caption: so in this case they know the concept
Caption: they don't know the terminology to use
Caption: which makes it really hard to actually
Caption: form a question so in that case you're
Caption: going to ask them some more clarifying
Caption: questions to figure out which of those
Caption: categories does this person fit into if
Caption: either of them and you're going to work
Caption: out
Caption: what are they actually asking me what do
Caption: they need help with
Caption: in your job
Caption: and actually this is something that
Caption: again apprentice said to me a couple
Caption: weeks ago is
Caption: it's a real skill to meet someone at the
Caption: level that they are at
Caption: just because you feel super confident in
Caption: this particular concept it doesn't mean
Caption: that you get to go on a rant about how
Caption: this thing works your job is to figure
Caption: out what this person is actually asking
Caption: and then give them the answer
Caption: appropriate to their level and even if
Caption: you're like
Caption: itching to tell them more until tell
Caption: them about the founder who wrote this
Caption: thing and then the history of oh then
Caption: this happened and then we merged this
Caption: new version 12 with blah blah not useful
Caption: your job is to match the level that
Caption: they're at and give them the exact
Caption: amount of information that they need
Caption: which leads us to the next step so i
Caption: want you to provide an explanation so
Caption: once you've figured out
Caption: what uh what they're actually asking you
Caption: because you've asked those clarifying
Caption: questions you're going to provide an
Caption: explanation
Caption: and if you don't know the answer to the
Caption: question you're not going to act with
Caption: confidence and just give them an
Caption: explanation you're going to google it
Caption: with them and together you're going to
Caption: build an explanation and you're going to
Caption: try and work out
Caption: how to actually explain the thing that
Caption: they don't understand and i do this all
Caption: the time i say i have no idea what
Caption: you're talking about but the internet
Caption: does and so we go and we look up some
Caption: blog posts or find some youtube videos
Caption: we learn about it together and then we
Caption: unpack it together
Caption: so once you've done that you're then
Caption: going to do
Caption: you're then going to confirm oh god
Caption: you're going to confirm understanding
Caption: so
Caption: you're not just going to go and read
Caption: blog posts figure it out give a
Caption: monologue assume they understood and
Caption: then carry on you're going to ask them
Caption: some more questions you're going to make
Caption: sure they actually understood what you
Caption: just unpacked and quite often i'll ask
Caption: them the exact same question that they
Caption: came to me with and if they can answer
Caption: it confidently sweet i've done my job
Caption: they now understand this thing but if
Caption: they're if they can mostly pull an
Caption: answer together but maybe they still use
Caption: the wrong terminology maybe they've
Caption: forgotten a word maybe it doesn't
Caption: actually quite make sense in this
Caption: particular context in other words
Caption: they're still confused then you're going
Caption: to ask them some more questions you're
Caption: going to try and figure out where are
Caption: they at now and what blanks do i need to
Caption: fill in now
Caption: and you might go through this process
Caption: many times so you ask a question you
Caption: give an explanation you'll confirm the
Caption: understanding they're still confused so
Caption: you're gonna go ask questions again and
Caption: that's where that skill of being able to
Caption: explain something in multiple different
Caption: ways comes in because you can't just
Caption: give an explanation confirm
Caption: understanding find out they're still
Caption: confused and give the exact same
Caption: explanation and expect there to be a
Caption: different result it's literally the
Caption: definition of insanity so you're going
Caption: to practice giving a different kind of
Caption: explanation instead
Caption: so once you've finally confirmed their
Caption: understanding
Caption: and i'd like to point out that even
Caption: though i've written make sense there
Caption: you're going to confirm their
Caption: understanding by doing anything except
Caption: asking does that make sense because
Caption: chances are the person's just going to
Caption: say yes because that feels like how
Caption: you're meant to answer that question not
Caption: useful so you can ask them a bunch of
Caption: other questions and determine for
Caption: yourself whether that seems to have made
Caption: sense for them
Caption: and then you're going to move on to
Caption: actually solving the problem if there is
Caption: one because at this point they might
Caption: have a solution just the explanation
Caption: that you've given might have given them
Caption: enough information to go with so they
Caption: have a solution so they need to move on
Caption: otherwise if they don't have a solution
Caption: now you're going to guide them to one
Caption: and again you might be pulling out blog
Caption: posts you might be finding other files
Caption: in the repo to share them too but you're
Caption: going to help them figure out a
Caption: potential solution you're not going to
Caption: give it to them you're going to have
Caption: chats you're going to have brainstorms
Caption: you're going to help them figure it out
Caption: for themselves but before you leave them
Caption: you're going to confirm their
Caption: understanding again you're going to make
Caption: sure that they understand what they
Caption: actually need to do now to solve that
Caption: problem so they might even tell you the
Caption: exact same thing that you just told them
Caption: but there might be a little bit more
Caption: confidence in their voice so you can say
Caption: i'm going to go look at this particular
Caption: repo i'm going to find this example
Caption: because i know that we did it here i'm
Caption: going to look at this pr that put it up
Caption: to see the notes so they might give you
Caption: a full explanation great that means
Caption: they've understood if they're still a
Caption: bit hazy they're not okay to be left
Caption: alone yet because you're just going to
Caption: leave them in a state of confusion which
Caption: is not what you want to do so you might
Caption: go through this cycle over and over
Caption: again as well
Caption: so finally once they have a solution and
Caption: they feel confident you're going to time
Caption: box them
Caption: so
Caption: depending on the complexity of the tasks
Caption: that you're giving them that time box
Caption: could be i'm going to come back to you
Caption: in 10 minutes it could be i'm going to
Caption: ask you you know tomorrow how that thing
Caption: went so you're just going to judge it
Caption: for yourself to see how complex the
Caption: thing is so for example a couple weeks
Caption: ago i was paired with someone who
Caption: was stuck on something to do with our
Caption: build pipeline
Caption: um
Caption: and as i went through this process
Caption: uh it probably took me longer than it
Caption: should have but as we went through this
Caption: process i realized oh this person
Caption: actually doesn't know where buildkite
Caption: fits in and how that connects to github
Caption: and how these things talk to each other
Caption: so i'm going to give her 10 minutes i'm
Caption: going to say i need you to go to some
Caption: reading on this particular thing here's
Caption: the page of the docs i'd suggest you
Caption: read in 10 minutes i'm going to come
Caption: back and we're just going to see
Caption: see how you're going
Caption: 10 minutes and she could explain it she
Caption: had that aha moment everything sunken
Caption: she now understood which was great it
Caption: means that we could repeat this process
Caption: all over again so you're going to time
Caption: box a task so for me that was go read
Caption: these docs
Caption: then once you've done that and you've
Caption: checked in with them you're now going to
Caption: consider frustration versus fun
Caption: is this person still having fun kat was
Caption: having the best time because she's
Caption: really into infrastructure and having
Caption: that aha moment was great for her so she
Caption: was ready to just ask the next question
Caption: be guided to a solution and then carry
Caption: on time box another 20 minutes move on
Caption: if the person is no longer if the person
Caption: is no longer having fun so they're
Caption: really frustrated and they're feeling
Caption: kind of dumb they felt like if they
Caption: haven't made progress
Caption: well then you're not just going to put
Caption: them into this loop of continuing to
Caption: feel dumb you're going to go back to the
Caption: very beginning you're going to ask them
Caption: more questions because maybe you didn't
Caption: nail it the first time maybe they didn't
Caption: actually know what they needed to ask
Caption: the first time so you're going to go
Caption: back through it all over again but this
Caption: time you're going to give some more
Caption: hints you're going to give them a little
Caption: bit more clues you're going to give them
Caption: the specific section of the docs the
Caption: specific line in the file the specific
Caption: part of that pr or whatever you're
Caption: sharing with them you're going to give
Caption: them more clues and you're going to go
Caption: through the process again
Caption: if you do and you get to the end and the
Caption: person is now just properly upset and
Caption: ready to throw their laptop out the
Caption: window because we have all been there
Caption: then you're just going to give them the
Caption: solution
Caption: and i'm going to tell you that sometimes
Caption: even though i said don't do this
Caption: sometimes you just have to give them the
Caption: solution
Caption: it's not their day
Caption: it's friday afternoon and they're really
Caption: tired because learning how to do these
Caption: things is really complicated that's
Caption: totally fine
Caption: chances are they have learned something
Caption: from this process but they're now
Caption: fatigued of learning new things and you
Caption: need to help them out a little bit more
Caption: but now you've both built this
Caption: relationship and understand this process
Caption: of how you're supposed what is a useful
Caption: way to help someone so you're still
Caption: going to try it again next time and
Caption: chances are they're going to be a bit
Caption: fresher they're going to come and know
Caption: you're about to ask me a bunch of
Caption: questions so i've got
Caption: the answers to those questions already
Caption: which an apprentice surprised me with
Caption: because she did that to me a couple of
Caption: weeks ago so this process
Caption: works
Caption: until someone's really frustrated in
Caption: which case it's totally fine just give
Caption: them the answer
Caption: just next time you'll try again we've
Caption: all been in that situation where for me
Caption: it's monday mornings i don't know my
Caption: brain's not on like i'm not learning
Caption: anything so just give me the answer
Caption: and while you're going through this
Caption: process there's a couple of things that
Caption: i want you to remember
Caption: so i want you to remember to have
Caption: compassion
Caption: the earlier someone is in their career
Caption: the easier it is to suffer with that oh
Caption: i'm so dumb and everybody else knows
Caption: more than me
Caption: and the longer you've been in your
Caption: career probably the more that you've
Caption: forgotten that this was you too like for
Caption: example
Caption: do you remember what it was like
Caption: navigating your code editor for the
Caption: first time you opened a repository with
Caption: thousands of files in it
Caption: probably not
Caption: but to someone who's just done that for
Caption: the first time
Caption: that is so hard
Caption: even if they've you know they've done a
Caption: bootcamp and they've learned how to use
Caption: this particular framework that is not
Caption: the same when there are thousands and
Caption: files in there instead of 20. it's
Caption: really hard navigating a code editor
Caption: so while you're explaining perhaps a
Caption: really technical concept remember the
Caption: earlier someone is in their career
Caption: just the harder they're going to
Caption: struggle just because you know it's not
Caption: muscle memory to use those shortcuts to
Caption: jump between files that that hasn't been
Caption: developed yet depending on the level
Caption: that they're at so while you're
Caption: mentoring someone have compassion really
Caption: think about where they are in their
Caption: career and what they're good at and what
Caption: they still need help with and adjust the
Caption: language that you use and the pace that
Caption: you go at to suit them
Caption: i also want you to talk about your
Caption: failures
Caption: this is really important because it's
Caption: really easy to feel like oh i messed up
Caption: and i don't want to be judged so i'm
Caption: going to hide it i'm not going to tell
Caption: anyone no we don't want that that's how
Caption: prod gets broken and everyone feels
Caption: confused so i want you to talk about
Caption: your failures
Caption: i broke prod a few weeks ago and i broke
Caption: it in a very bad way because we have
Caption: this little toast that comes up from the
Caption: corner and when you click it you go to a
Caption: site that where people sign up and
Caption: actually give us money so envaro
Caption: actually makes money from it and i
Caption: accidentally got rid of the toast and no
Caption: one noticed and that was bad so instead
Caption: of
Caption: you know trying to bury that and think
Caption: oh just fix this i went to the team like
Caption: hey team i messed up la la la la la and
Caption: so we fixed it right but then what was
Caption: important about that process is that i
Caption: then went to the apprentices like oh
Caption: here's what i did yesterday i really
Caption: messed up and so we actually did our own
Caption: little postmortem about oh what went
Caption: wrong and how about we dig through the
Caption: code and figure out how that happened
Caption: and let's talk about the process that we
Caption: went through to discover that this thing
Caption: was actually an issue by the way when
Caption: you're doing something like that check
Caption: that it actually works on prod because
Caption: no one did and no one noticed so talk
Caption: about your failures with them quite
Caption: often they're going to ask you um
Caption: probing questions that are going to make
Caption: you realize yeah
Caption: maybe we should adjust our process maybe
Caption: i should have changed prod when i
Caption: deployed this thing rather than thinking
Caption: prod and staging we're going to be the
Caption: same state because that's ridiculous
Caption: they're never the same state
Caption: yeah there was it was a whole problem it
Caption: was a whole thing staging was
Caption: this is the state that i was in that day
Caption: when i broke that thing it was not a fun
Caption: day
Caption: i also want you to remember to provide
Caption: meaningful work with meaningless
Caption: deadlines
Caption: and this is something that i think we do
Caption: really well at envato with our
Caption: apprentices so we go we actually sit on
Caption: delivery teams we send we spend about
Caption: six weeks on a team and then we hop
Caption: around
Caption: and while we're on those delivery teams
Caption: our apprentices are given real cards
Caption: that do contribute um to the product
Caption: that actually make a difference but
Caption: they're given cards specifically that
Caption: aren't urgent they have absolutely no
Caption: deadline attached in fact the earlier
Caption: they are on in their apprenticeship the
Caption: more likely that in their first six
Caption: weeks they will not finish that card and
Caption: instead our goal is to go on tangents
Caption: learn a bunch of stuff in the process
Caption: and make sure we do a really good
Caption: handover with the team when we leave the
Caption: team
Caption: and what that ends up doing is it just
Caption: takes away the pressure
Caption: there's no like ah i need to learn this
Caption: thing but this thing's due next week so
Caption: hayley can you just tell us so we can
Caption: feel like we're making progress it takes
Caption: all that away but at the same time they
Caption: get to feel like they're actually making
Caption: a difference on the product that they're
Caption: working on so meaningful work meaning
Caption: meaningless deadlines is probably if you
Caption: take one thing away this is this should
Caption: be it this makes a significant
Caption: difference
Caption: when you're onboarding someone new to
Caption: your team
Caption: and finally i'd also like you to
Caption: remember to leave your ego at the door
Caption: just because you're a contributor to
Caption: django doesn't mean that you need to you
Caption: know throw your weight around and say oh
Caption: but i wrote it so i know that it works
Caption: the space you need to do it this way
Caption: like in a mentoring session totally not
Caption: useful
Caption: totally not encouraging totally not
Caption: friendly
Caption: so leave your ego at the door it doesn't
Caption: matter how much experience you have when
Caption: you're mentoring someone you're focused
Caption: on them you're not focused on your
Caption: experience you're focused on them and
Caption: what they need to learn
Caption: so
Caption: we've talked about how mentoring can
Caption: help you to be a better dev we've talked
Caption: about how it can help you to be an
Caption: effective mentor and now i want us to
Caption: talk about how can you actually use all
Caption: these skills to make a difference in our
Caption: industry
Caption: so i would like to point out that only
Caption: training those that are already in
Caption: engineering doesn't really help with our
Caption: diversity issue
Caption: like if you look around this room
Caption: how many women in here and how many
Caption: dudes are here like if you only train
Caption: the cohort of people in this room are we
Caption: helping to produce more role models or
Caption: improve the diversity in industry no we
Caption: are doing a great thing because we're
Caption: helping each other and we're helping
Caption: build our community to upskill and
Caption: that's fantastic but you're not helping
Caption: with diversity so i want you to use
Caption: these skills to actually shift the
Caption: needle and gets more interesting and
Caption: different
Caption: teams built in our industry
Caption: so i want you to consider taking on
Caption: career changes
Caption: for diversity of thought and experience
Caption: and what i mean by this is
Caption: so many places go to like a university
Caption: for their main recruitment drive if you
Caption: look at the number of people who are in
Caption: university or tafe or even boot camps
Caption: they're they are predominantly men this
Caption: is not a secret so if that is where
Caption: you're primarily going to recruit then
Caption: you are primarily attempting to recruit
Caption: men and you're leaving women behind so i
Caption: want you to consider taking on career
Caption: changes people who have taught
Caption: themselves at home and maybe done a few
Caption: workshops and they're feeling confident
Caption: and they're feeling like they're ready
Caption: to learn and you might think oh but do
Caption: they have the experience they haven't
Caption: done this training if someone is
Caption: prepared to change careers i can
Caption: guarantee you they are prepared to learn
Caption: and they are going to be dedicated they
Caption: will be a great person to hire and train
Caption: yourself
Caption: i'd also like you to consider upskilling
Caption: those that agenda diverse to create more
Caption: role models
Caption: and how might you do that
Caption: so at envato we like to say our
Caption: apprentice program isn't equal but it is
Caption: fair
Caption: and we say that because our apprentice
Caption: program actually only takes on
Caption: people who
Caption: identify as women we do not take cis men
Caption: into the apprentice program
Caption: and at first thought and i bet someone
Caption: in here is really outraged about that
Caption: right now
Caption: so yes you are right it is not equal but
Caption: quite often someone says well that's not
Caption: fair and what i would like to point out
Caption: to you is that if you go to university
Caption: or tafe or a boot camp you'll see plenty
Caption: of men and you'll see hardly any woman
Caption: men have every opportunity to get into
Caption: this industry it is much harder to be a
Caption: woman in this industry
Caption: it is much much harder to break into
Caption: this industry it is much harder to get
Caption: over your imposter syndrome in this
Caption: industry it is much harder to find a
Caption: role model in this industry and if you
Caption: would like to argue with me on that
Caption: later i i'm more than happy to because
Caption: this rant can go on a lot longer than
Caption: this one slide so i would like you to
Caption: consider when you go and hire someone
Caption: who's new to this industry
Caption: could you be more diverse in your hiring
Caption: practices
Caption: could you maybe remove names from cvs
Caption: for example and just take out
Caption: you know the burden of oh i've seen
Caption: their name so i know this person's a
Caption: woman i know this person's a man and
Caption: just higher on you know the experience
Caption: and what they bring to the team and how
Caption: willing they are to learn
Caption: rather than
Caption: going to your universities and going to
Caption: your tafes and going to your boot camps
Caption: unless it's she codes because that's for
Caption: women
Caption: because then you're already you've got a
Caption: problem and you're hiring a pipeline
Caption: already
Caption: and quickly i'd also like us to run
Caption: through just what are the other benefits
Caption: of upskilling internally
Caption: you can teach people the habits you want
Caption: especially if you're hiring someone and
Caption: this is their very first role in tech if
Caption: you hire a senior that person's coming
Caption: with opinions and that person's coming
Caption: with biases i don't like that tech i
Caption: live in the google space oh you use
Caption: teams i'll never be i'll never work for
Caption: you
Caption: you know or oh i'm a react person i
Caption: couldn't possibly like we're not going
Caption: to do this new project in view because
Caption: we like react like a senior has opinions
Caption: a junior doesn't a junior is going to
Caption: hear that you love react and think yeah
Caption: i love react to
Caption: so teach you know the more junior you
Caption: hire the more opportunity you've got to
Caption: teach people the habits that you want
Caption: them to have which sounds really evil
Caption: but like it's really good for your
Caption: company
Caption: it also i want you to think of it as an
Caption: investment so this is an opportunity to
Caption: give your reputation a boost
Caption: within envato our apprentice program is
Caption: really well recognized and people are
Caption: excited about our apprentice program
Caption: because the apprentices that we create
Caption: like they are exceptional developers
Caption: they do extremely well at envato and it
Caption: generally just kind of helps boost uh
Caption: just the morale around the company like
Caption: whenever we get new apprentices in ev
Caption: everybody's like we're a virtual
Caption: community but somehow everyone's kind of
Caption: a bit like oh my god the apprentices are
Caption: starting today or apprentice graduation
Caption: will they come into my team like it's
Caption: actually been really great for the
Caption: company
Caption: and as a result we also get longer
Caption: tenures the apprentices that we train in
Caption: envato stay with us for a really long
Caption: time which is awesome but also a lot of
Caption: people at envato they talk about when we
Caption: ask them because i'm kind of nosy i ask
Caption: people why do you like invader to the
Caption: other people i work with and a lot of
Caption: people mention the apprentice program
Caption: and mention the like we're actually
Caption: walking the walk of trying to improve
Caption: the diversity in our industry you know
Caption: we're actually
Caption: taking two apprentices assigning them a
Caption: developer mentor and training them for
Caption: nine months is a huge investment and
Caption: people recognize that within our company
Caption: so
Caption: oh i feel like i should have had some
Caption: water at some point during that talk
Caption: okay we talked about my career journey
Caption: how did teaching help me to be a better
Caption: dev effective mentorship and improving
Caption: diversity in our industry i really hope
Caption: that this has at least inspired you
Caption: to maybe think about how can you be a
Caption: better mentor or what can you take back
Caption: to your team and maybe you know you
Caption: could even harass the senior leaders and
Caption: your team said hayley said it's really
Caption: great to hire juniors who aren't don't
Caption: just all look the same as everybody in
Caption: our team maybe we should actually do
Caption: that that would be really awesome if you
Caption: actually considered that
Caption: so thank you so much uh for spending
Caption: time with me today um check me and
Caption: follow on twitter if you'd like to chat
Caption: about anything in these slides don't
Caption: check out my blog because i broke it
Caption: this week and i don't know how to fix it
Caption: and please
Caption: please leave me some feedback um on the
Caption: ddd website that would be really great
Caption: so thank you everybody
Caption: thank you so much
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: foreign
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: foreign
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our poses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott hanselman's
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that
Caption: uh the app is almost ready uh we just
Caption: need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we needed asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use zero can do that yeah but it
Caption: needs to be secure we can't have our app
Caption: compromised by breaches not a problem
Caption: and it needs to scale if we get hit with
Caption: a ton of traffic and if it stalls or
Caption: freezes up i will get fired we can do
Caption: this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep
Caption: think our customers are gonna love it i
Caption: got a real app now folks
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hi
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this office nerd's nerding what we're
Caption: doing is we're talking to people all
Caption: over the world because we're stuck in
Caption: our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition
Caption: hello hello thank you so much for
Caption: joining us in the room today um i've got
Caption: a really long bio jamie butler is a lead
Caption: consultant at telstra purple that's all
Caption: you get
Caption: without further ado here's jamie
Caption: all right just make sure you can hear me
Caption: fantastic i think you can because i can
Caption: hear me um welcome welcome thank you for
Caption: coming to my talk lessons from the video
Caption: game industry i am jamie butler the
Caption: consultant at purple as you just heard
Caption: what does that mean it means i'm quite a
Caption: generalist so consulting i'm on
Caption: different gigs every three six months
Caption: and that's different tech stacks that's
Caption: different corporate environments that's
Caption: different this that and the other thing
Caption: and within that space i do all sorts as
Caption: well do agile
Caption: coaching discovering
Caption: requirements building the actual
Caption: software
Caption: testing deploying ops just a little bit
Caption: of everything so the point that i'm
Caption: making there is
Caption: i'm a generalist but i also love video
Caption: games uh and so i wanted to talk to you
Caption: about gdc the game developer conference
Caption: housed in san francisco yearly
Caption: and i think i hit on this one because i
Caption: love video games and two because i'm
Caption: such a generalist and there is just
Caption: so much going on with these conferences
Caption: uh people are delivering lessons on
Caption: leadership they're delivering lessons on
Caption: building a business from scratch they're
Caption: develop delivering lessons on cool
Caption: ux development techniques and software
Caption: development techniques so there's a
Caption: little bit of something there for
Caption: everybody and for a general
Caption: generalist like me there's tons for me
Caption: to consume
Caption: so the goal here is really just to
Caption: illuminate you to the
Caption: high high value of this resource get you
Caption: consuming it and the way i'm going to do
Caption: that is just share with you a handful of
Caption: lessons that i personally learnt just
Caption: from watching these gdc conference talks
Caption: and yeah
Caption: see what we discover
Caption: so first off we have
Caption: cursed problems
Caption: the idea of a cursed problem
Caption: is something that alex jeff from riot
Caption: games kind of put together over the last
Caption: few years and he gave a talk about it uh
Caption: it's the idea of your in a product
Caption: development setting or he thinks of it
Caption: as a game development setting but really
Caption: it's a product development setting where
Caption: you've hit a design problem you
Caption: literally can't solve and what you
Caption: really need to do is identify that it is
Caption: an unsolvable problem as early as you
Caption: possibly can so you don't drag your team
Caption: of 10 1500
Caption: people in your company along for the
Caption: ride
Caption: um
Caption: so curse problem as he puts it
Caption: is a core conflict between the promises
Caption: of your product and it's imp important
Caption: to note here that the promises might be
Caption: intended or explicit like this is what i
Caption: built my product to do that's the point
Caption: of it or they might be derived by your
Caption: users your users might get your hand
Caption: their hands on your product and go ah
Caption: this is what this product is for not
Caption: actually what you intended for it to be
Caption: and if those that come into conflict
Caption: with each other um then you cannot
Caption: proceed with the design that you've got
Caption: you need to pretty fundamentally change
Caption: the design
Caption: and while i won't go into it alex
Caption: provides a whole bunch of techniques for
Caption: identifying these curse problems and for
Caption: offering ways to you know make those
Caption: fundamental shifts that you need to make
Caption: if you end up in that situation
Caption: and the example of a curse problem that
Caption: he gives i give several but the one that
Caption: i really liked is you can see tucked
Caption: away there
Caption: if you're familiar with diablo 3 at all
Caption: the diablo 3 auction house so diablo 3
Caption: is a luda game you
Caption: use cool spells or swinging axe and kill
Caption: a whole bunch of enemies and
Caption: you get cool loot and every time you do
Caption: you're like what did i just get you know
Caption: is it better than what i have before is
Caption: it really awesome legendary is it
Caption: amazing and they added this idea of an
Caption: auction house where you can
Caption: sell the loot that you've got and buy
Caption: loot that you really want and
Caption: what happens there is you get this
Caption: conflict of the whole kind of core
Caption: premise of your game
Caption: in one aspect it's a looter and you
Caption: should be looking forward to that moment
Caption: of finding the cool thing that you
Caption: really want be able to add an auction
Caption: house suddenly it's just everything that
Caption: i get is just something i'm going to
Caption: sell so i can save up and buy the thing
Caption: i really want and those are
Caption: fundamentally
Caption: contradictory experiences and the
Caption: solution for diablo iii once they
Caption: realized that they were in this position
Caption: was to just kill it they got rid of the
Caption: auction house because they what they
Caption: wanted to keep was that core looter
Caption: experience
Caption: and
Caption: my example when i think and try and
Caption: translate it more to what i do in
Caption: product development i had to think about
Caption: um tumblr so
Caption: tumblr was originally built as like a
Caption: blogging platform a really simple
Caption: blogging blogging platform sign in with
Caption: an email suddenly you've got a blogging
Caption: platform it's really easy to use
Caption: but what the implied promise seem to be
Caption: from the user's perspective is a cool
Caption: debating platform where they can debate
Caption: the fundamentals of society and
Caption: those two things are not the same one is
Caption: all about broadcasting your opinions and
Caption: one is about having a healthy back and
Caption: forth with somebody else and or in an
Caption: open forum and the way that tumblr dealt
Caption: with that was just kind of go oh well
Caption: this is really taking off we're going to
Caption: focus on this we're going to focus on
Caption: this back and forth and chaining blog
Caption: posts onto each other to create kind of
Caption: a chained argument not like just a
Caption: blogging platform
Caption: so there are multiple different ways to
Caption: solve a curse problem but that's the way
Caption: the tumblr uh took
Caption: so next so that that's kind of a bit of
Caption: a design lesson that we can learn um
Caption: moving over a little bit to the tech
Caption: side uh we have uh we went from curses
Caption: to cursing with weather
Caption: are your tests by kevin dill of kythera
Caption: ai uh this guy works on
Caption: traversal program uh traversal ai so
Caption: bots moving around a world like think
Caption: cyberpunk 2077 and all the people moving
Caption: around in it um and this talk was pretty
Caption: much just a straight up evangelizing of
Caption: unit test uh mentality and testing
Caption: mentality which apparently the game
Caption: industry is not very mature in they
Caption: don't you know feel the need to write
Caption: automated tests all the time so it's
Caption: pretty straightforward in that regard
Caption: but the nugget lesson that i pulled out
Caption: of this one was
Caption: when kevin started talking about tests
Caption: that they have to write that are just
Caption: going to take like 30 seconds or 45
Caption: seconds to run um and those are kind of
Caption: annoying right they bloat your test
Caption: suites runtime horrifically especially
Caption: you know if you're going to write one
Caption: test really what you're going to do is
Caption: write like a permutation of that test
Caption: seven or eight different versions of
Caption: that test and suddenly just in one set
Caption: of tests you've got a four minute test
Caption: suite running and that's kind of yuck
Caption: so the nugget that i got from him is to
Caption: just tag those and many different
Caption: testing libraries like jest and
Caption: n-unit and c-sharp and what have you
Caption: will let you tag your tests and just
Caption: only run those slow tests overnight
Caption: don't run them when you're doing your
Caption: regular building when you're doing your
Caption: mergers into master or what have you
Caption: run them overnight or just before uh
Caption: deployment to production whichever comes
Caption: first
Caption: and that way you will come in the
Caption: morning all that really slow testing is
Caption: done you can spot a problem if it's
Caption: there and deal with it and you get the
Caption: value of those slow tests which might be
Caption: they might need to be slow because
Caption: you're testing something that should
Caption: take a long time or they might just be
Caption: slow because you know it's a really
Caption: meaty process that you're testing but
Caption: yeah a little uh tech a bit of wisdom
Caption: that i got from that
Caption: next up we have something more along the
Caption: design lines so
Caption: this is going to be a common theme
Caption: you're going to keep hearing me say
Caption: there are lessons coming from every
Caption: discipline
Caption: in gdc
Caption: and this one was critiquing game visuals
Caption: common problems and how to solve them by
Caption: ali overton of spryfox
Caption: and the core of the talk was just
Caption: figuring out how you can critique
Caption: a visual design figure out what needs to
Caption: be improved about it and then make those
Caption: improvements
Caption: but i loved this talk because i tell you
Caption: what i'm so bad at this it's unreal
Caption: any time i work on a piece of software
Caption: myself and there isn't a designer
Caption: involved somebody's poor eyes will
Caption: probably bleed and
Caption: i have tried to solve this for myself
Caption: many times i've just like gone to blog
Caption: posts and i've gone to
Caption: you know learning material to figure out
Caption: color theory i've studied color theory
Caption: got color theory down it still makes
Caption: people's eyes bleed what's going on and
Caption: this video finally got through to me and
Caption: i'm sure it would be different for
Caption: everybody but for me it was just like
Caption: the i just wasn't taking saturation into
Caption: consideration i didn't even really
Caption: understand what saturation was trying it
Caption: was getting at um and everything i ever
Caption: designed was just like full saturation
Caption: all the time and that's why the eyes
Caption: were bleeding and now i know
Caption: um so very happy for that i mean you've
Caption: got an example here of um one of the
Caption: little bits that she took us through
Caption: and you can just see that the one on the
Caption: left is um really like pretty evenly
Caption: desaturated and you have to work hard to
Caption: decide what's important in that image
Caption: but the one on the right there's a bit
Caption: more
Caption: value contrast and saturation contrast
Caption: and you can see that the little man with
Caption: the sword is important maybe the tree is
Caption: important
Caption: but lots of little lessons like that
Caption: stacked in there
Caption: and now we come to war of a bit of a
Caption: leadership bit of a cultivating culture
Caption: a new business
Caption: kind of lesson so this one was from
Caption: victoria tran of inner sloth the guys
Caption: that make among us the talk was called
Caption: charming communities
Caption: and she took us through a whole bunch of
Caption: lessons on how to create a really
Caption: positive culture and she was always
Caption: framing it in
Caption: terms of the community that is playing
Caption: her game and interacting on socials and
Caption: interacting with each other in the game
Caption: but every single lesson that she went
Caption: through i was
Caption: realizing could be applied equally well
Caption: to building the culture within your
Caption: company or within your team if you're
Caption: just like a lead developer in a team you
Caption: can use these skills to make sure that
Caption: your team is happy and healthy and
Caption: functional engaged if you're a ceo you
Caption: can be exercising these techniques as
Caption: well
Caption: um
Caption: pretty sure she got a lot of this stuff
Caption: from a book called uh the power of
Caption: moments which if you've heard of it is
Caption: it worth a read
Caption: but the the
Caption: key things i'll just quickly mention
Caption: that she talked about were um having
Caption: moments of surprise and levity so if you
Caption: could you know always having to deliver
Caption: the same kind of dry email once a week
Caption: of like oh here's what's changed in our
Caption: apple um release notes what have you um
Caption: insert jokes insert little moments that
Caption: people can relate to and have a good
Caption: time with
Caption: um especially the more unexpected the
Caption: better the more it will catch people and
Caption: go ah that was interesting um
Caption: moments of connectivity and
Caption: empathy so
Caption: best example that i really enjoyed was
Caption: paying attention if somebody's mentioned
Caption: something that's going on in their life
Caption: or something they're really really
Caption: passionate about
Caption: and you come across them or you're
Caption: chatting to them two weeks later
Caption: completely without provocation just
Caption: bring it up shows that you're listening
Caption: that you care that you think about that
Caption: person um and they'll feel connected to
Caption: you and that will breed this really
Caption: positive warm relationship
Caption: a bit of just rapport building really
Caption: and
Caption: uh yeah there's one that i've forgotten
Caption: and i don't want to refer to my notes so
Caption: we'll move on
Caption: um
Caption: next up we have isabel mccart david
Caption: richard of behaviour interactive
Caption: i wanted to include this one because
Caption: there's
Caption: at least from my perspective as a
Caption: developer
Caption: i don't like to think too much about the
Caption: money or the
Caption: the financial strategy of things but you
Caption: can learn those lessons if you go and
Caption: have a look at gdc so isabel mccart and
Caption: david richard were the
Caption: cfo and the
Caption: head designer or director
Caption: from behavior interactive
Caption: and these guys are responsible for dead
Caption: by daylight which is uh online
Caption: multiplayer game it's free one charac
Caption: one person plays a monster and another
Caption: handful of people play survivors it's a
Caption: a
Caption: asymmetrical
Caption: competitive game
Caption: but it's run with macro transactions
Caption: that's their profit model is monetizing
Caption: through buying skins and stuff like that
Caption: the talk is all about
Caption: respecting your users
Caption: being really careful to not exploit them
Caption: um trying to run that business model
Caption: which is really kind of in a lot of ways
Caption: unpopular there's a lot of assumptions
Caption: baked into it that you're just kind of
Caption: gonna get a crap product unless you
Caption: chill out all the time
Caption: doing that in a really respectful way
Caption: and they come up with a lot of
Caption: techniques
Caption: a lot of core kind of vision statements
Caption: about for example um
Caption: the the core product all by itself needs
Caption: to be completely playable enjoyable on
Caption: its own
Caption: things that cost money should really
Caption: only add kind of aesthetic value or vibe
Caption: shouldn't really change the core
Caption: mechanics of your product and i feel
Caption: like that's very applicable to
Caption: um you know just software as a service
Caption: products that we sell maybe we're
Caption: providing advertising or what have you
Caption: but just to do it in a respectful way
Caption: but the key quote that um dave richard
Caption: came out with that i latched on to and
Caption: the lesson that i really took from this
Caption: mostly was a respectful monetization
Caption: design helps to get buy-in from our dev
Caption: team and when i heard that
Caption: what i really heard was
Caption: running an ethical respectful business
Caption: gets team members on board and giving it
Caption: their best so
Caption: i'm sure we'd all love to be working in
Caption: really socially forward businesses like
Caption: carbon offsetting businesses
Caption: environmentally positive businesses
Caption: businesses that help um guys doing it
Caption: tough that kind of thing
Caption: um but even if you're not even if you're
Caption: in resources or you're just working on
Caption: an entertaining product or
Caption: just tech for the sake of tech and
Caption: helping people do tech better
Caption: as long as you're
Caption: operating that business ethically
Caption: respectfully caring about your users and
Caption: caring about the impacts that your
Caption: business is having that's the key thing
Caption: and i think if you do that people will
Caption: get on board they'll work their hardest
Caption: they'll be engaged you won't have team
Caption: members that are kind of maybe looking
Caption: out the door
Caption: and that's the lesson that i took from
Caption: that particular talk and also it was
Caption: just really interesting learning more
Caption: about
Caption: monetization strategies and what you see
Caption: in um
Caption: free to play games out there
Caption: and
Caption: last one in terms of lessons is data
Caption: informed decisions the champions of
Caption: league of legends so
Caption: i know we've just finished talking about
Caption: charming your communities and making
Caption: really positive and healthy communities
Caption: and really respecting your audience but
Caption: now we're going to talk about league of
Caption: legends
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so it's just a fun way to learn new
Caption: stuff so i've played a lot of league of
Caption: legends i've been that guy i've screamed
Caption: at the screen
Caption: i've uh
Caption: i've not typed nasty things to my
Caption: teammates i promise
Caption: um
Caption: but i really love league of legends
Caption: anyway it's a really fun game uh seeing
Caption: red and it's own funky skin there
Caption: cho'gath my favorite character
Caption: um and this talk was all just you know
Caption: da da da da all different um fun
Caption: analyses of league of legends champions
Caption: what's popular
Caption: what
Caption: what they can do analysis to decide is
Caption: really pick up and play and which
Caption: characters are really really niche like
Caption: people not many people play them but the
Caption: people that play them absolutely love
Caption: them and all different kinds of analysis
Caption: to
Caption: derive those sorts of
Caption: insights
Caption: and i'm going to be completely honest
Caption: with you data doesn't really fill my cup
Caption: and if left to my own devices i don't
Caption: generally go out there and learn
Caption: interesting data concepts
Caption: but you slap league of legends on it and
Caption: i will um
Caption: and true of many many other videos so
Caption: there are tons of games covered in gdc
Caption: that people love spider-man god of war
Caption: little indie games like uh
Caption: actually that's going to escape me i
Caption: can't point to anyone specific um but
Caption: yeah little indie games all the way up
Caption: to like the big aaa games you got the
Caption: director of god of war telling you all
Caption: about what the pitch was like for that
Caption: game and how key it was that they kept
Caption: sticking to
Caption: this idea of a father-son relationship
Caption: and everything has to be driven by that
Caption: and all of that stuff is just
Caption: entertaining to consume these videos and
Caption: in the middle of it learn some really
Caption: valuable lessons um and that's all i
Caption: really wanted to get you guys to do here
Caption: today so your next step is to google or
Caption: not google but
Caption: search on youtube gdc vault i do
Caption: specifically say don't google it search
Caption: it on youtube and that's because if you
Caption: google it you'll go to their website and
Caption: you will learn something that i've been
Caption: leaving to the very end
Caption: it's very expensive to get a full access
Caption: membership to gdc it costs 600 a
Caption: year-ish
Caption: um but having said that
Caption: tons of their content is on youtube and
Caption: really probably the content that we're
Caption: interested in more in the product
Caption: development space than the game
Caption: development space
Caption: that content is
Caption: more general more applicable more kind
Caption: of enticing
Caption: the stuff that's hidden behind their
Caption: paywall is more really hardcore
Caption: technical insights to say physics
Caption: engines lighting engines
Caption: real game design sorry level design
Caption: interest which while super cool if
Caption: you're really technical
Caption: less applicable to our work um so yeah
Caption: search gdc vault on youtube and have a
Caption: good time
Caption: and
Caption: i just want to say before i wrap up
Caption: thank you very much to our sponsors
Caption: especially telstra purple no i'm kidding
Caption: um i work for tesla purple as you recall
Caption: but no yeah all our sponsors um i
Caption: wouldn't be able to have my kid in that
Caption: um
Caption: uh right now getting looked after if it
Caption: weren't for them so thank you very much
Caption: to them
Caption: uh and that is it for me cool
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: hello hello oh wow that's working um we
Caption: have one minute and this is a big room
Caption: to exit and enter i'm gonna see if
Caption: there's one short question out there
Caption: because jamie's a fountain of knowledge
Caption: here
Caption: anyone gonna go for a really quick
Caption: question
Caption: no i'm sure you'll be around for the
Caption: afternoon so thank you jamie everyone no
Caption: worries thank you very much
Caption: thank you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on uh
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: good
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we needed asap okay team
Caption: what's the status on the app we're good
Caption: to go except our login experience is a
Caption: disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use zero can do that yeah but it
Caption: needs to be secure we can't have our app
Caption: compromised by breaches not a problem
Caption: and it needs to scale if we get hit with
Caption: a ton of traffic and if it stalls or
Caption: freezes up i will get fired we can do
Caption: this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: good
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our
Caption: dream come business i've always wanted
Caption: to join scott held someone's ooh
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering i.t
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together
Caption: now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: hello hello welcome back i'm seeing some
Caption: familiar faces as well so yeah welcome
Caption: back
Caption: uh it's my delight to introduce
Caption: doctor isn't it right dr ashley aitken
Caption: ashley aiken has a passion for helping
Caption: businesses create value with i.t helping
Caption: startups find successful business models
Caption: and all things related to ai minds and
Caption: brains
Caption: today he's going to explain what it
Caption: means to say we are all computers and
Caption: the implications this may have for
Caption: building conscious machines
Caption: buckle up it's going to be a wild ride
Caption: here's ashley wonderful
Caption: thank you very much hannah and thank you
Caption: much everyone for coming along
Caption: as you said my talk today i'm a computer
Caption: and so are you and my goal here is
Caption: really trying to to convince you of the
Caption: validity of this statement okay but
Caption: after we've done that we'll have a look
Caption: at some more bigger questions which i
Caption: don't have the answer to but i think you
Caption: might find interesting as well
Caption: so i'm a computer
Caption: and so are you
Caption: let's go on
Caption: this all started many years ago when i
Caption: was doing a phd in ai and i was trying
Caption: to make computers work more like humans
Caption: be more able to match the world and and
Caption: work in a fuzzy world in a wishing world
Caption: but after doing my phd for a number of
Caption: years i realized really it wasn't about
Caption: that it came back to me thinking that
Caption: computers are actually more like oh
Caption: sorry the brain is more actually more
Caption: like computers and this really shocked
Caption: me i've gone a total flip of what i'm
Caption: doing that's what i want to try and
Caption: explain to you today
Caption: but just to be clear up front when i say
Caption: a brain is more like a computer i i
Caption: don't mean a von neumann type
Caption: architecture void norman type
Caption: architecture with a cpu and ram of
Caption: course we're not like that
Caption: and one of the things i want to talk
Caption: about today is what actually it is it to
Caption: be a computer
Caption: i did computer science for many years i
Caption: worked as an academic in computer
Caption: science for many years and i tell you
Caption: the 95 of people in that domain probably
Caption: don't know what it means to be a
Caption: computer it's something you program for
Caption: sure but what does it mean to be a
Caption: computer that's what we'd be talking
Caption: about as well
Caption: so here's the sort of overview of the
Caption: story from my uh talk the first big
Caption: question is what are computers to get
Caption: you to understand that question the
Caption: second one is what am i
Caption: and by contrast you because you're
Caption: similar to me hopefully
Caption: and then last one the big question there
Caption: what is i
Caption: that's the one which i may not be able
Caption: to answer but we'll get a good start on
Caption: i think
Caption: um a bit background about myself i work
Caption: as an i.t consultant for a company
Caption: called business aspect parent company
Caption: data number three i have a background in
Caption: ai cognitive science and neuroscience
Caption: but i think of myself as a software
Caption: developer and an i.t person and a
Caption: computer scientist i have a big focus on
Caption: innovation consulting i like to help as
Caption: i think hannah said startups but also
Caption: organizations in any sector any stage of
Caption: maturity including startups to find new
Caption: businesses if the old businesses are
Caption: going away to find a new one and we do
Caption: that using an exploration metaphor
Caption: i also run the lean startup perth meetup
Caption: and i have a number of startups myself
Caption: the current one which is just about to
Caption: go live soon is called lean explorers
Caption: club so please look out for that
Caption: okay so also thanks to our sponsors and
Caption: the volunteers who run this conference
Caption: particularly i met some at the speech
Caption: catch-up night insight and versant and
Caption: planet so thanks to them but thanks to
Caption: all the sponsors who helped this make
Caption: this event possible
Caption: okay in this same room a couple of years
Caption: ago i gave a talk on functional
Caption: programming and my goal there was to
Caption: make everyone's mind explode bro blew
Caption: their brains with the oils quantum
Caption: computed sorry blow their minds with
Caption: quantum computers and last year i tried
Caption: to help people become anti-fragile and
Caption: when you lose your head to grow back two
Caption: new ones to replace that one head
Caption: this year i'm taking a bit of a
Caption: different tack as i mentioned in the
Caption: brief i'm going to be trying out some
Caption: pain okay so experience something pain
Caption: but also trying some mind-altering
Caption: experiences
Caption: trying to get you to think differently
Caption: about your mind so let's see how we go
Caption: with that
Caption: okay so the first point here what are
Caption: computers think to yourself what do i
Caption: what's you know it's a digital computer
Caption: i program it but what do we mean when we
Caption: talk about computers
Caption: this sort of thing okay a computer what
Caption: do we mean by that
Caption: now maybe if you're sort of got a
Caption: computer science background or a
Caption: technical background you may think oh
Caption: well computers are equivalent to turing
Caption: machines or they have a von neumann
Caption: architecture and so forth there's
Caption: something which is runs like this
Caption: or you may also think you know computer
Caption: computability can i calculate something
Caption: with this computer or compute something
Caption: with an algorithm you may think about
Caption: algorithms and you may think about oh
Caption: your computers do calculations these
Caption: sort of things and these are all correct
Caption: but they don't get to what the essence
Caption: is of a computer and that's what i want
Caption: to try to explain now this slide has a
Caption: lot of text so it's the formal
Caption: definition of things but i'll just point
Caption: out the key points to you i'll read it
Caption: out to you it says a computational
Caption: system
Caption: is a physical system that allows three
Caption: specific but more general levels of
Caption: description
Caption: above that of the physical level and
Caption: these three levels are what we call the
Caption: functional level the symbolic level and
Caption: the semantic level you may have heard of
Caption: those
Caption: there are a couple extra requirements
Caption: the symbolic states in the symbolic
Caption: level they refer to things so when your
Caption: computer has a symbol for a car it's not
Caption: actually the car inside the computer
Caption: it's a reference to that car
Caption: and the third one says that the symbols
Caption: need to be consistent under
Caption: transformations
Caption: that's the definition of a computational
Caption: system
Caption: and i want to explain that to you so you
Caption: can see what computers really are and
Caption: then we'll look at how the brain works
Caption: so of course the computer is a physical
Caption: system so any physical system we can
Caption: give a description
Caption: in terms of the physical states where
Caption: the particles are in which direction
Caption: they're moving
Caption: and of course they obey the physical
Caption: laws so the particle's going to go
Caption: around ignoring quantum mechanics for
Caption: now they're going to move around like
Caption: particles do and bump bump into things
Caption: and so forth
Caption: we can't break the physical laws but we
Caption: can change the configuration of the
Caption: system to make it do things while still
Caption: obeying those physical laws
Caption: so we have this physical level
Caption: description we start off in a physical
Caption: state on the left our initial state we
Caption: go to the next state according to the
Caption: physical laws the physical laws tell us
Caption: how we go from one state to the next and
Caption: so on and so on
Caption: that's pretty obvious
Caption: but now what we say that one thing that
Caption: a computational system allows is that
Caption: allows a higher level description
Caption: we don't need to talk about the
Caption: particles anymore when you describe your
Caption: computer you don't say well these are
Caption: particles here and particles moving
Caption: there
Caption: when you describe a computer in the
Caption: functional description you describe it
Caption: in terms of functional states
Caption: and the functional specification or
Caption: configuration of that system
Caption: these functional states are actually
Caption: defined in terms of equivalent sets of
Caption: physical states and this is a really
Caption: important concept we're going to a
Caption: higher level description
Caption: ignoring the difference in certain
Caption: physical states and we'll describe it
Caption: that way let me show you in a picture
Caption: the first one before i show you that
Caption: we're looking at a very simplified model
Caption: of computing and so forth here which can
Caption: look at one input gives us a direct
Caption: output and we'll explain the complexity
Caption: later on so we on the left we have the
Caption: input state and on the right we have the
Caption: output state
Caption: input goes to output very simple way to
Caption: understand things
Caption: so let's have a look at the next slide
Caption: sorry i lost my connection there what is
Caption: this functional description
Caption: for a computer
Caption: well as i say we ignore the position of
Caption: the atoms and then moving around in the
Caption: electrons and we tend to describe the
Caption: physical
Caption: computer in terms of voltages this
Caption: memory chip this memory cell has a
Caption: voltage of 0.2 volts or this wire has a
Caption: voltage
Caption: so this is another description of a
Caption: computer above the physical level in
Caption: terms of these voltages in the
Caption: particular memory cells for example
Caption: and of course
Caption: when you go from the input here 0.2
Caption: volts you may go to another state 0.9
Caption: volts
Caption: but again that's just really an
Caption: abstraction over the lower level states
Caption: lots of different atoms running around
Caption: in different directions could make
Caption: equivalent to 0.9 volts
Caption: so the ones down the bottom are showing
Caption: you there's a whole lot of equivalent
Caption: physical states which correspond to 0.2
Caption: volts there's a whole lot of equivalent
Caption: physical states which correspond to 0.9
Caption: volts but we ignore that detail and just
Caption: look at the top
Caption: so when the system actually goes from
Caption: input to output it could go from this
Caption: physical state to that physical state
Caption: inside the set or it could do a
Caption: different one or it could do a different
Caption: one we don't really care about that
Caption: detail we just care at the functional
Caption: level it goes from 0.2 volts to 0.9
Caption: volts that's a functional description
Caption: someone is interested in electronics
Caption: would probably look at that sort of
Caption: description
Caption: that's the functional description of a
Caption: computer but where it gets interesting
Caption: now is when we step up one level to this
Caption: symbolic level description
Caption: in symbolic states and rules
Caption: here we have symbols
Caption: which are referring to things and rules
Caption: which how they describe how they change
Caption: so have a look again at our diagram now
Caption: we think of this computer as a symbol
Caption: system we have a symbolic state zero or
Caption: one
Caption: and that zero one in memory cells could
Caption: be anything less than 0.5 volts so for
Caption: 0.4 or 0.2 or 0.3 we don't care we say
Caption: it's a zero
Caption: a false or a zero bit
Caption: and going from input to outputs because
Caption: okay we go from zero to one there's a
Caption: rule if zero then one because it's wired
Caption: up in this way we don't care whether the
Caption: final state is 0.6 or 0.9 we ignore that
Caption: detail and just say it goes from a 0 to
Caption: 1.
Caption: so now we're thinking about bits we're
Caption: working at a symbolic level in terms of
Caption: symbolic states and the rules which say
Caption: how they transfer or change
Caption: so this is the symbol level and this is
Caption: the level we sort of program computers
Caption: at and we'll get back to that as i said
Caption: it doesn't matter the states below we
Caption: don't care about the details of course
Caption: it is going from one physical state to
Caption: the next but we just treat them as
Caption: equivalent at this symbolic level
Caption: now the last level is the semantic level
Caption: this is the highest level where we talk
Caption: about semantic states
Caption: and principles of operation so we have
Caption: physical laws we have rules and now we
Caption: have principles of operation
Caption: semantic states are similarly defined in
Caption: sets of equivalent states of equivalent
Caption: symbolic states
Caption: and the principles describe how you go
Caption: from one semantic state to another
Caption: semantic state
Caption: this shows you in a computer at the top
Caption: there we have this semantic level now we
Caption: represent the symbols below in quotes
Caption: but how do you sort of represent a
Caption: semantic state we sort of put them in
Caption: brackets
Caption: so on the left for the input state we
Caption: have four plus two
Caption: but that's equivalent to a number of
Caption: different symbolic states we could be in
Caption: it could be in four plus two or three
Caption: plus three
Caption: doesn't matter what those symbols are
Caption: they're all equivalent to the concept of
Caption: four plus two
Caption: and when you use that four plus two
Caption: semantic state
Caption: it goes to the semantic state of six
Caption: and that could be represented in
Caption: different ways as well it could be the
Caption: number six or it could be written word
Caption: six we don't care
Caption: so again we've gone to a higher level of
Caption: description which is more easier to
Caption: understand and more useful the semantic
Caption: level the semantic level is also called
Caption: the knowledge level
Caption: so and again we go at that symbolic
Caption: level still there it's not gone away we
Caption: can go from different symbolic states
Caption: but we ignore that and just say we go
Caption: from the four plus two to the sixth
Caption: state
Caption: so this is what competition
Caption: computational systems are
Caption: a physical system with three levels of
Caption: abstraction above that physical level
Caption: going from functional states to symbolic
Caption: states with rules to semantic states
Caption: with principles of operations
Caption: and computers are computational systems
Caption: as i've shown they have these three
Caption: levels of description and the symbols
Caption: can refer to things and the symbols can
Caption: be consistent so computers are
Caption: computational systems and that's what we
Caption: mean what is a computer it's a
Caption: computational system
Caption: so why are they computational systems as
Caption: i mentioned they have these three
Caption: different levels the functional level
Caption: with the voltages and the functional
Caption: specification the symbolic level with
Caption: the symbols and the rules of behavior
Caption: sort of like the code and the semantic
Caption: level with the concepts and the
Caption: principles
Caption: now the nice thing about this is these
Caption: higher levels of description can ignore
Caption: the lower level details and you get much
Caption: more value from a higher level if i told
Caption: you all the atoms in this thing were
Caption: this organized you couldn't tell me much
Caption: about the thing but if i told you a
Caption: higher level description it's more
Caption: useful to you and this is why we do the
Caption: levels of abstraction
Caption: now computers aren't the only things
Caption: that are computational systems
Caption: of course a calculator it's almost like
Caption: a computer
Caption: but even a physical calculator like this
Caption: is a computational system it's just got
Caption: a different implementation it's not
Caption: implemented in terms of electronics it's
Caption: basically implemented in terms of
Caption: mechanical states and mechanical
Caption: configuration
Caption: but we abstract over those mechanical
Caption: cache
Caption: states to say there's a symbol if the
Caption: button's up this high or above this
Caption: level then it's a one or if it's down
Caption: below this level it's a zero or so forth
Caption: so we can implement a computational
Caption: system in a mechanical system as well
Caption: and this gives us a good uh
Caption: hint that possibly we can implement the
Caption: brain in a non-biological system because
Caption: we're abstracting above that biology
Caption: biology to the functional to the
Caption: symbolic and semantic levels
Caption: and again in a calculator the semantics
Caption: are pretty clear
Caption: the semantics of a calculator are the
Caption: number states we don't care how the
Caption: numbers represented in the calculator
Caption: whether it's buttons or number or a
Caption: screen
Caption: and the principles of operations for a
Caption: calculator are mathematics
Caption: the add operation the minus operation
Caption: the multiply operation and the symbols
Caption: need to be constructed to obey those
Caption: particular semantics to build a
Caption: functional calculator
Caption: so we have lots of different
Caption: computational systems calculators
Caption: computers and others
Caption: but the big question now
Caption: is to ask what am i and what are you
Caption: and i want to make the claim that we're
Caption: a computational system as well and try
Caption: and explain that
Caption: now when i'm starting here i'm starting
Caption: from certain assumptions which you may
Caption: disagree with but these are my
Caption: assumptions
Caption: my assumption is that basically we're a
Caption: biological information processing system
Caption: we don't have electrons running around
Caption: in our brain in our neurons we have ions
Caption: running around doing some similar stuff
Caption: but basically it's a wiring system to
Caption: make our information processing happen
Caption: so we're not assuming there's any sort
Caption: of ghost in the machine or souls or
Caption: spirits we're saying everything about us
Caption: needs to be explained in terms of this
Caption: biological information processing system
Caption: and we want to try and do that now
Caption: so of course here's a physical system my
Caption: son we can describe him in a physical
Caption: states and physical laws
Caption: but we're interested in the whole body
Caption: we're interested in just the brain
Caption: so we can have a physical level
Caption: description of the brain its physical
Caption: states and physical laws that say how
Caption: those states will change because of
Caption: course the brain
Caption: operates under the physical laws it
Caption: can't break those laws
Caption: but we want to have a look inside that
Caption: and say hey what's inside the brain all
Caption: these neuron things like the wiring and
Caption: basically if you don't know about it
Caption: they have connections at the end where
Caption: other neurons connect to they add up all
Caption: the symbols coming in if it goes over a
Caption: certain threshold then the neuron sends
Caption: out a signal if it doesn't it stays
Caption: pretty quiet
Caption: so this is the sort of mathematical
Caption: equation on the right but that's how
Caption: neurons look like
Caption: inside our brain there are apparently 80
Caption: billion neurons
Caption: it's down on we used to think it was 100
Caption: billion but they did some more studies
Caption: and we've got 20 billion less but
Caption: doesn't make us any less smart we can
Caption: still do a lot with 80 billion
Caption: it's a complex network of these neurons
Caption: in the brain
Caption: so how do we look at this in terms of
Caption: computational systems
Caption: the first thing is of course that
Caption: physical level description i mentioned
Caption: physical states and physical laws the
Caption: brain obeys physics can't not obey
Caption: physics
Caption: and it goes from state to state
Caption: but now when it gets interesting we talk
Caption: about the functional level description
Caption: of the brain
Caption: so we're going to abstract away from
Caption: those physical states
Caption: and so let's look about let's talk about
Caption: the firing rate of a neuron not about
Caption: where all the ions and atoms are inside
Caption: the neuron let's abstract away and we
Caption: can say the neuron is firing at this
Caption: rate or that rate or this rate or that
Caption: weight it's usually a low rate or a high
Caption: rate
Caption: and the way the actual brain is is
Caption: configured is sort of wired so it's
Caption: functional specification is sort of like
Caption: the wiring of the
Caption: computer circuits but now it's the
Caption: wiring of these neurons
Caption: so when we look at the brain we can
Caption: abstract over those physical states and
Caption: say this neuron here is firing or not
Caption: firing that's the input and then the
Caption: output has some sort of rule set up
Caption: because of the configuration to be
Caption: firing or not firing
Caption: so we're abstracting over the physical
Caption: states to get a functional description
Caption: in terms of firing rates of the neurons
Caption: now as i say we're looking at simplified
Caption: systems here we're not going to actually
Caption: look at uh complex systems
Caption: so
Caption: it's more here just an input output
Caption: we're not looking at the complexes of
Caption: all parts of the brains just yet input
Caption: and output so we're in a particular
Caption: input state we go to an output state
Caption: that's the symbolic oh sorry now look at
Caption: the symbolic level description the
Caption: symbolic level abstracts against above
Caption: those firing rates
Caption: so we don't care whether the firing
Caption: weight is 10 firings per second or five
Caption: firings per second if it's low that's
Caption: considered a zero now if it's very high
Caption: firing rate 20 30 50 100 firings per
Caption: second then we consider it a one
Caption: so we've got this on and off switch
Caption: again
Caption: sort of like a bit but of course neurons
Caption: aren't bits they're very unreliable they
Caption: tend to work in collections but for our
Caption: abstraction here just think of them as a
Caption: single bit in the brain so the brain is
Caption: configured to go from symbolic state to
Caption: symbolic state one neuron turns on the
Caption: other one turns off because of their
Caption: connections
Caption: we can ignore the details of all the
Caption: firing and just think about these
Caption: symbolic states the higher level
Caption: description
Caption: so what about the semantic level well
Caption: now we can abstract again over those
Caption: symbolic states
Caption: and say hey
Caption: down the bottom here we have some inputs
Caption: coming into the computer maybe the
Caption: import is something like you see a cat
Caption: or you hear a cat or you read the word
Caption: cat
Caption: you know lots of inputs lots of bits are
Caption: firing in your brain when you see a cat
Caption: that's the symbolic level seeing a cat
Caption: but up the top there we now have this
Caption: semantic state oh we're seeing a cat
Caption: we don't care whether it's this cat or
Caption: that cat or how we see the cat our brain
Caption: says we'll operate the same way no
Caption: matter what the different symbols are
Caption: and what we're going to do in this
Caption: simple case is announce the cat hey
Caption: there's the cat
Caption: but we also don't mind how we announced
Caption: the cat we could say cat or we could
Caption: write cat or we could shout cat
Caption: again input goes to output we don't care
Caption: how the symbols work as long as it
Caption: is consistent with this semantic level
Caption: that's the semantic level description
Caption: of how the brain works see a cat you
Caption: announce a cat just to make it clear
Caption: on the left is our input on the right is
Caption: our output so we see this cat we shout
Caption: cat
Caption: but hey it could be a different cat it's
Caption: a different symbol but the same
Caption: semantics to us in our operation is that
Caption: it's just a cat so we'll say cat
Caption: and of course you could say cat in sign
Caption: language rather than saying cat
Caption: it doesn't matter these different
Caption: symbolic operations are still equivalent
Caption: enough we're announcing there's a cat
Caption: and it could be a whole lot of different
Caption: cats and we could say things in
Caption: different ways and so forth
Caption: so the semantic level describes this
Caption: higher level you're seeing this concept
Caption: of a cat and you're reacting to it in a
Caption: certain way
Caption: so brains are computational systems they
Caption: have those three levels of descriptions
Caption: we talked about
Caption: uh before symbolic and so forth
Caption: the functional level the symbolic level
Caption: and the semantic level
Caption: and again these higher levels
Caption: abstractions are very useful
Caption: another example you see a fire
Caption: of course your action may be
Caption: scream out fire
Caption: but your conceptual semantic level could
Caption: be if we see danger then sort of panic
Caption: or do something like that so it doesn't
Caption: matter to us whether we see the smoke we
Caption: still may shout fire
Caption: and it doesn't matter whether we see
Caption: we shout fire or we run away okay we're
Caption: doing something equivalent action or
Caption: dial 9-1-1 again at the semantic level
Caption: the behavior is described as you see a
Caption: fire or you hear fire or whatever fire
Caption: you panic or do something
Caption: so that's the semantic level description
Caption: of the brain
Caption: now if you say brain is a computational
Caption: system and i hope it's sort of convinced
Caption: a bit there
Caption: the key thing to note here that it
Caption: explains everything but it also explains
Caption: nothing what does it explain well it
Caption: explains what type of system the brain
Caption: is it's a computational system
Caption: that's really important it explains how
Caption: the human bay of behavior works we have
Caption: these different levels which abstract
Caption: over each other
Caption: and it provides an operational
Caption: definition of meaning
Caption: what is the meaning of the cat it's all
Caption: these different symbolic behaviors which
Caption: are equivalent to that we're abstracting
Caption: over the set of symbols
Caption: that's very important things it doesn't
Caption: explain it doesn't tell us the complete
Caption: wiring of the brain
Caption: we're still working that out trying to
Caption: understand the functional architecture
Caption: of the brain
Caption: and it doesn't explain how brains learn
Caption: which is a very important thing we'll
Caption: see soon
Caption: calculators don't learn but brains do
Caption: learn
Caption: so let's talk a bit about now how we
Caption: could maybe implement a mind which is
Caption: the running program of a brain and there
Caption: are two different approaches the
Caption: classical approach the old-fashioned
Caption: approach which was classical ai
Caption: you may have heard of expert systems
Caption: these were symbol systems they worked
Caption: with symbols like cat and dog and
Caption: produced responses like say hello or
Caption: whatever
Caption: and now these new connectionist ones or
Caption: neural network approaches these were
Caption: different they were sort of lower level
Caption: i want to explain how they differ in
Caption: terms of this computational model
Caption: so first of all we said that a classical
Caption: digital computer and a brain are both
Caption: computational systems they both have
Caption: three different levels symbolic and
Caption: semantic
Caption: they're similar in that way
Caption: but how are they different a classical
Caption: digital computer
Caption: the difference is this
Caption: when we program a classical digital
Caption: computer
Caption: we program at the symbolic level
Caption: so the computer wiring is set up for us
Caption: and we program by saying here comes the
Caption: symbolic the symbols and the rules which
Caption: will say how those symbols change which
Caption: is your code
Caption: but the mind doesn't have a program at
Caption: the symbol level
Caption: it's only programmed at the functional
Caption: level the wiring that the genes specify
Caption: so where do the symbols come from in the
Caption: brain
Caption: they're actually learned
Caption: these symbols and the rules which say
Caption: how they move from one to the other your
Caption: behavior actually emerges as you learn
Caption: and watch the environment
Caption: and the semantics emerge as well
Caption: so the symbols emerge and the semantics
Caption: emerge
Caption: this raises a big question for me
Caption: are mines turing equivalent
Caption: we have a look on the left hand side
Caption: classical ai the symbols there will
Caption: match the symbols in a turing machine
Caption: yes it's like a turing machine
Caption: but on the right hand side when we start
Caption: off with the mind there are no symbols
Caption: and these symbols emerge and they're
Caption: continuously changing and the rules are
Caption: emerging and changing but a turing
Caption: machine says we have these particular
Caption: symbols and these rules
Caption: i claim that's not really a turing
Caption: machine equivalent because it's
Caption: defining and emerging symbols rather
Caption: than having them specified
Caption: but how do we actually um or the
Caption: similarities now between a neural
Caption: network type solution a connectionist ai
Caption: and the mind when we set up neural
Caption: networks with aws or your own
Caption: programming you're basically specifying
Caption: the functional level how these
Caption: artificial neurons are connected and
Caption: then it tries to learn so it learns
Caption: symbols i can recognize a cat and say
Caption: cat
Caption: so it's very similar to the mind
Caption: specified at the functional level
Caption: now when we're trying to implement one
Caption: of these artificial neural networks at
Caption: the functional level how can we
Caption: implement it well we could make our own
Caption: neurons but we tend to like to use a
Caption: classical computer
Caption: to implement
Caption: a neural network and run it how does
Caption: that work
Caption: this shows you how what actually happens
Caption: here
Caption: what actually happens we use a classical
Caption: computer program a symbolic system
Caption: so you write some code but the code you
Caption: write the symbols in your program are
Caption: not equivalent to the symbols in the
Caption: mind or the connectionist system
Caption: the symbols you use in your program
Caption: match the functional level
Caption: of the uh
Caption: connection of system so you're using
Caption: your symbols to say specify the firing
Caption: rate of the neurons
Caption: not the symbols themselves
Caption: so we're using symbols at a different
Caption: level that's why they're not equivalent
Caption: so we can implement these connection of
Caption: systems in classical ai symbol systems
Caption: but we're implementing them by
Caption: implementing their functional level
Caption: okay so this is what the conclusion of
Caption: my sort of research was my phd and so
Caption: forth there are two different types of
Caption: computation
Caption: there's what i call discrete computation
Caption: this is where you specify in your
Caption: program everything up to the symbol
Caption: level so you write the program in terms
Caption: of symbols to define some semantic level
Caption: you're writing some calculator code to
Caption: make a calculator implement mathematics
Caption: discrete because the rules are chunky if
Caption: this then that the symbols are precise
Caption: and static
Caption: i call it discrete computation
Caption: the brain however as i'm trying to imply
Caption: to you here is different
Caption: i call it continuous computation because
Caption: again it's only specified at the
Caption: physical and the functional level
Caption: the symbols and the semantics emerge as
Caption: a result of learning i'm trying to show
Caption: you there the wiggly symbols rather than
Caption: square boxes preset values the symbols
Caption: emerge and your definition or
Caption: understanding or operational behavior
Caption: with regards to cats change as you learn
Caption: about cats and you see more cats your
Caption: brain always changes and the phys and
Caption: the symbols and the rules are in
Caption: continuous dynamic flux and evolving
Caption: continuously
Caption: so continuous computational systems
Caption: so there we go
Caption: i hope i've shown you or given you an
Caption: idea
Caption: that i am a computer a computational
Caption: system
Caption: and you are too
Caption: but to be more precise about this
Caption: i'm a continuous computational system
Caption: and you are too so we're not like a
Caption: classical computer program with symbols
Caption: where i could compute a continuous
Caption: computational system with emerging
Caption: symbols and emerging rules and emerging
Caption: semantics
Caption: and of course the learning has to be
Caption: good to ensure we actually emerge and
Caption: learn things properly
Caption: okay so um
Caption: that leads us to the big question now
Caption: what is i and this we get some audience
Caption: participation in this one
Caption: so
Caption: what is i well what are we there's a lot
Caption: of things that people talk about when
Caption: they talk about i
Caption: they talk about
Caption: awareness
Caption: self-awareness free will
Caption: qualia if you don't know what that means
Caption: we'll explain it in a second and
Caption: consciousness of course
Caption: these are the big questions the
Caption: consciousness one is called a clm
Caption: career limiting move if you start to
Caption: researching consciousness then your
Caption: chances of
Caption: regards to succe systems
Caption: the first one awareness i think is quite
Caption: easy if you think about it
Caption: computationally
Caption: if you're aware of something say in your
Caption: environment
Caption: it basically means you show consistent
Caption: and appropriate behavior with respect to
Caption: perceptions of it
Caption: so for example if i'm aware of this
Caption: microphone i know not to touch it and i
Caption: know if i need to touch it
Caption: my symbols are working properly in a
Caption: nice semantically consistent way
Caption: but if i don't unaware of that
Caption: microphone and i bump it
Caption: i haven't been aware of it my system
Caption: symbols and so forth wasn't aware of
Caption: that
Caption: so my behavior to it wasn't appropriate
Caption: or successful in terms of what i was
Caption: doing
Caption: similar with
Caption: seeing objects other objects in the
Caption: world
Caption: so awareness is about really having some
Caption: computational semantics which are
Caption: appropriate for the things you're trying
Caption: to be aware of are these three levels
Caption: there
Caption: now there's a classic example of where
Caption: this goes wrong there's a famous book in
Caption: research it says the man who mistook his
Caption: wife for a hat
Caption: he had a brain disorder when he thought
Caption: his wife's head was a hat and was trying
Caption: to put it on very sad of course
Caption: but i hope you see what this means it
Caption: means it hasn't got the right symbols
Caption: and the right semantics for the hat so
Caption: the behavior is inappropriate
Caption: so it's failed so he hasn't really got
Caption: this awareness of a hat for what it
Caption: really is it hasn't got the
Caption: computational levels set up and working
Caption: correctly
Caption: true story you can read about that a
Caption: book by alive
Caption: oliver sacks
Caption: what about self-awareness
Caption: well it's the same sort of thing but as
Caption: you go through life of course you see
Caption: your body with you it's all around there
Caption: and you start to behave consistently
Caption: with regards to your body
Caption: so you're aware of yourself being with
Caption: you all the time
Caption: self-awareness is consistent appropriate
Caption: behavior with respect to internal and
Caption: external perceptions of yourself so i
Caption: see this thing here and i'm set up
Caption: correctly i've learned correctly this is
Caption: my hand it's not someone else's hand
Caption: right and i know i can control it and do
Caption: things with it
Caption: as i mentioned here it's not just
Caption: external stuff
Caption: when you talk externally you can hear
Caption: yourself but also we have this loop
Caption: going on in our head where we can
Caption: actually hear ourselves we can talk
Caption: internally our mental dialogue this is
Caption: an example of a computational system as
Caption: well are you responding to your thoughts
Caption: appropriately with new thoughts and so
Caption: forth
Caption: so again computational awareness of your
Caption: environment and awareness of yourself
Caption: self-awareness i think they're not too
Caption: hard
Caption: when it gets more difficult or a bit
Caption: more difficult is free will
Caption: okay so everyone says what is free will
Caption: and whatever and they have all these
Caption: ideas and we need some soul or spirit to
Caption: make us be able to make decisions when i
Caption: come down to it i think it's pretty easy
Caption: what is free will
Caption: free will is making decisions and taking
Caption: actions
Caption: based upon your current inputs and your
Caption: past experience
Caption: okay what else could it be
Caption: all right so you're making a sin you
Caption: asked me now what do you want for lunch
Caption: lamb or fish
Caption: something's happening in my brain based
Caption: upon the inputs you gave me and the
Caption: experience i have some process is going
Caption: along to actually produce a result i
Caption: want fish
Caption: okay
Caption: that's what free will it's
Caption: we're making again it's a mechanic
Caption: mechanical biological machine making a
Caption: decision nothing fancy there
Caption: now it does mean somewhat that we're
Caption: deterministic which people all don't
Caption: feel like i can't make my own decisions
Caption: well how do you make your decisions you
Caption: make them based on current inputs and
Caption: your past experience what else could you
Caption: want
Caption: and don't worry even though it is
Caption: deterministic there's lots of
Caption: non-linearity in the system lots of
Caption: noise and quantum indeterminacy you
Caption: could never predict what someone's going
Caption: to say or do
Caption: at that sort of level
Caption: so free will i think is also not
Caption: difficult
Caption: where things get very difficult is when
Caption: we talk about qualia i don't know if
Caption: you've heard about qualia but it's the
Caption: philosophical content uh philosophical
Caption: concept of what's it like to
Caption: so we can behave consistently with
Caption: respect to things there's a certain
Caption: difference when you feel what it's like
Caption: to do something or see something
Caption: that's what i want to talk about now
Caption: we're going to talk about what's it like
Caption: to feel pain
Caption: what's it like to see
Caption: and what's it like to see red
Caption: and we'll try and see no pun intended
Caption: whether these things relate to the
Caption: computational approach we've looked at
Caption: for the human mind
Caption: so this is where we have to ask the
Caption: audio the controller to please lock the
Caption: doors we can do some experiment with
Caption: pain and we ask any are there any
Caption: volunteers here who want to experience
Caption: some pain
Caption: no volunteers so everyone can do it
Caption: all right
Caption: so i promise some pain
Caption: so get ready
Caption: what i want you to do please get your
Caption: arms all limbed up get your arms free
Caption: put your phones down
Caption: i want you to pinch yourself
Caption: on your arm somewhere
Caption: pinch very hard not too hard don't make
Caption: some damage but so you can feel it see
Caption: that word there feel it
Caption: okay so you pinched your arm
Caption: what happened then
Caption: the question is where is the pain you
Caption: felt something pain but where is the
Caption: pain and most of time you say oh yeah
Caption: it's in my arm i can feel me pinching
Caption: there
Caption: but remember what's happening here
Caption: all that's happening is there's a
Caption: detector there which is sending an
Caption: electrical signal up to your brain so
Caption: when it gets to your brain it's just a
Caption: on or off
Caption: there's no pain in that signal
Caption: so where does the pain come from
Caption: it's not in your arm
Caption: the pain is in your mind
Caption: your mind is constructing this pain
Caption: for a good reason of course because
Caption: maybe you've got a knife on your arm or
Caption: you're pinching too hard or sofa that
Caption: wants to stop you
Caption: but you're feeling this pain
Caption: so pain is constructed in the mind
Caption: quite interesting to think about all
Caption: right another
Caption: experiment
Caption: what does it feel like
Caption: to see red or what does red feel like
Caption: so the question here is to look at
Caption: something red
Caption: i don't know if you can see something
Caption: red around anyone got some red on if not
Caption: we can look at this
Caption: so look at this red dot and think what
Caption: does it feels like something to look at
Caption: red doesn't it feels like red
Caption: what does that mean
Caption: remember what's happening here it's just
Caption: electrical signals in your brain
Caption: but somehow your brain is constructing
Caption: this thing that it feels like red
Caption: this is a big puzzle this is the qualia
Caption: puzzle what does it mean to feel like or
Caption: to see red
Caption: now lots of answers to possible answers
Caption: to this but
Caption: another thing here and my hypothesis is
Caption: when you're sitting back and you're
Caption: looking at red
Caption: what you're actually doing is behaving
Caption: in a way
Caption: consistent with all the states of
Caption: different reds and you're giving that a
Caption: label doesn't matter whether it's light
Caption: red or dark red or this shade of red
Caption: your semantics are this is red
Caption: so you're identifying it as red and
Caption: you're saying i'm feeling red when i'm
Caption: looking at that
Caption: again it comes to this computational
Caption: approach to different levels up to
Caption: semantics it doesn't matter what the
Caption: symbol is different types of red the
Caption: semantics it's red and you're responding
Caption: to the fact yes i'm seeing red it's a
Caption: red thing and it feels like red
Caption: not totally convincing that i don't know
Caption: if you don't believe me on that i'm not
Caption: totally convinced yet but that's the
Caption: feeling i
Caption: have it gets a bit weirder what about
Caption: black when you close when you um don't
Caption: see anything
Caption: it looks black but why does it look why
Caption: does it feel black
Caption: why couldn't it be white
Caption: you know what what defines something as
Caption: white or you say well because there's
Caption: lots of light
Caption: but
Caption: we're looking at it we see it's white
Caption: but what why couldn't we see it as black
Caption: it's almost arbitrary whether you have
Caption: white or black
Caption: when we feel it to be white or black but
Caption: of course we need something to be able
Caption: to distinguish them so these are what
Caption: we've basically got
Caption: i think you could swap them around and
Caption: everything would still work fine it
Caption: would be a sort of negative color system
Caption: rather than a positive color system
Caption: so this brings us to the last little
Caption: experiment
Caption: what it feels like to see
Caption: and this experiment is important
Caption: please close your eyes
Caption: when closing your eyes and hopefully you
Caption: can't see anything it's pretty dark
Caption: although i may see some white spots and
Caption: so forth and at the count of three i
Caption: want you to open your eyes
Caption: one
Caption: two
Caption: three
Caption: now you're seeing here
Caption: right you're experiencing you can feel
Caption: what it looks like to see
Caption: now the really important point here is
Caption: your behavior could be consistent with
Caption: seeing i could notice these microphones
Caption: here and act appropriately but it's
Caption: almost like a step up to say yes i'm
Caption: behaving consistently but it actually
Caption: feels like something to see
Caption: and that's the tricky point about this
Caption: quality it feels more like more than
Caption: just behaving consistently
Caption: of course when you think about it you go
Caption: from black to seeing something
Caption: really you know about
Caption: what happens in there we ask the
Caption: question what does it mean to see
Caption: everyone will give you a description of
Caption: yes we have the the image coming through
Caption: the up the um the lenses in the eyes
Caption: it's sort of inverted it goes into the
Caption: back of the brain
Caption: that's just like the wire coming up your
Caption: arm
Caption: it's not really important
Caption: because at the end it's just electrical
Caption: signals at the back of your brain
Caption: how does your brain turn those
Caption: electrical signals into this experience
Caption: that i feel like i'm seeing things it's
Caption: more than just behaving consistently
Caption: so we have this
Caption: but how do we get the fact that yes i'm
Caption: seeing something
Caption: similarly we can look at bats bats are a
Caption: bit different of course they don't look
Caption: with a normal sight they use
Caption: echolocation
Caption: so what's it like to see as a bat
Caption: we don't really know is it like that or
Caption: do they see it more like we'd guess you
Caption: know closer things are brighter
Caption: a different way of perceiving the world
Caption: what does it feel like to be in batch is
Caption: a question that philosophers often ask
Caption: okay the last one here is tricky it's
Caption: consciousness and i'm running out of
Caption: time
Caption: we've mentioned all these things so
Caption: consciousness is often involved with all
Caption: of these but there's something more than
Caption: just behaving consistently
Caption: people suggest that consciousness could
Caption: live in the microtubules of the neurons
Caption: these very small things inside the
Caption: neurons i think that's just putting the
Caption: problem down a level
Caption: others think that it could be due to
Caption: with quantum mechanics we need quantum
Caption: mechanics to be conscious
Caption: i think that's just again putting the
Caption: issue away we know we're a biological
Caption: system the consciousness didn't come in
Caption: there because of quantum mechanics
Caption: because it came through evolution
Caption: and the last one says well maybe the
Caption: world consists of
Caption: space and time yes we agree
Caption: energy and matter yes that's the
Caption: universe but now maybe there's a third
Caption: thing called consciousness and a lot of
Caption: physicists now are believing this
Caption: because they couldn't see other ways of
Caption: explaining consciousness
Caption: but again to me when i look at the
Caption: evolution of the species i think where
Caption: did consciousness come in it wasn't some
Caption: time that the universe jumped into our
Caption: head and made us conscious it's more
Caption: about the physical architecture and
Caption: function of the brain
Caption: so as i put here a computational theory
Caption: of consciousness basically it's got to
Caption: do with self-awareness
Caption: so you act behave consistently with
Caption: regards to your states like seeing red
Caption: or seeing or pain
Caption: i think you can get most of it out of
Caption: that but maybe not all
Caption: the last thing here to look at is how do
Caption: we make robots
Caption: conscious that's the whole idea we want
Caption: to make ai systems we can make
Caption: computational ai systems but how can we
Caption: make a robot that actually has
Caption: consciousness now these are robots with
Caption: cameras like eyes
Caption: they can see and behave consistently but
Caption: do they actually feel like they're
Caption: looking as we do
Caption: um
Caption: so here's our robot we can make that
Caption: robot work well when it turns its
Caption: cameras on it can avoid the cars and
Caption: this sort of stuff
Caption: but will the robot say that actually can
Caption: feel that it's seeing things
Caption: how can we make that actually happen
Caption: and again i think basically we use this
Caption: computational theory we design our
Caption: robots not just to behave consistently
Caption: with regards to the inputs and so forth
Caption: but to be a self-aware of the fact that
Caption: they are seeing they can see red and
Caption: they can feel pain
Caption: and then our behavior becomes consistent
Caption: with us actually feeling like we're
Caption: seeing so i say yes i can see i can see
Caption: things i can feel it
Caption: so basically again taking the
Caption: computational approach but i won't go
Caption: into that haven't got time
Caption: that's about um all there i'll leave a
Caption: second or two for um
Caption: i'll just jump through this because i
Caption: haven't got time to do that
Caption: questions just to summarize i didn't
Caption: want to do this
Caption: sorry to summarize what we're seeing and
Caption: maybe you agree or don't agree i've
Caption: explained what a computational system is
Caption: a system that allows three levels of
Caption: description
Caption: have symbols that represent things and
Caption: maintain semantics under transformations
Caption: i've talked about von neumann computers
Caption: are discrete computational systems
Caption: and the brain and connection of systems
Caption: are more like continuous computational
Caption: systems
Caption: i've talked that being a computational
Caption: system allows us to operationalize
Caption: explain
Caption: things like awareness self-awareness and
Caption: possibly qualia and consciousness as
Caption: this consistent level of behavior
Caption: but importantly if any of you are
Caption: working in robotics or ai the real
Caption: question is how can we make robots truly
Caption: human-like
Caption: we'll need to make them computational
Caption: systems but also aware self-aware and
Caption: have feelings and consciousness
Caption: so we can already already make lots of
Caption: robots that are very smart and can do
Caption: things
Caption: but can we make robots that actually
Caption: feel pain
Caption: maybe that's useful in an evolutionary
Caption: approach or a programming approach so
Caption: it's aware of the fact that it's got a
Caption: knife in its leg or something like this
Caption: can we make robots that can actually see
Caption: and be aware of seeing not just behave
Caption: consistently with what it means to see
Caption: and i had a bit trouble finding an image
Caption: but can we make robots that are happy
Caption: and joyful
Caption: okay not many robot photos show them
Caption: being happy we haven't tried to make
Caption: them feel like they're happy
Caption: so all right that's about all there so i
Caption: have any questions or quick questions
Caption: a lot of stuff but uh
Caption: hopefully it provided some explanation
Caption: of what it means to see and to be
Caption: computational yep
Caption: okay first question
Caption: uh so just on your first point um
Caption: you said that
Caption: you
Caption: there might be an advantage for having a
Caption: ai system actually fill consciousness
Caption: right but is there really any advantage
Caption: to doing that like
Caption: very good question very good question is
Caption: there any advantage to actually feeling
Caption: something rather than just behaving
Caption: consistently you know we could if
Caption: someone puts a knife in our leg we could
Caption: behave consistently and pull it out and
Caption: not even be aware of it in fact when
Caption: you're sleepwalking
Caption: people sleepwalk and they do eating and
Caption: everything when they're asleep so
Caption: they're not conscious but they're doing
Caption: all they're behaving
Caption: so it's a really good question i believe
Caption: there must be some evolutionary
Caption: advantage to know you're in in pain
Caption: maybe even to learn from that experience
Caption: so it's not just behaving consistently
Caption: you're aware of the fact yes that was
Caption: pain maybe i can change my behavior and
Caption: so forth so evolutionary i think why are
Caption: they here and probably because it makes
Caption: us a fitter species to survive
Caption: i think the only difference you'd see is
Caption: that
Caption: um
Caption: the aia system
Caption: would write a wikipedia page about
Caption: qualia
Caption: i think that's the only difference that
Caption: would see provided that i didn't have
Caption: that could be true but but we have a lot
Caption: of feelings you know we feel what it's
Caption: like to see we feel like it's what it's
Caption: like to be red we feel pain
Caption: why not if we didn't feel pain we could
Caption: just do stuff without feeling it would
Caption: that be okay i think there's something
Caption: to that feeling pain you really learn
Caption: something from it as i say it's more
Caption: like it's a higher level abstraction
Caption: doesn't matter what sort of pain it is
Caption: we're just learning to respond to pain
Caption: but it's an open question
Caption: i'm just going to add that we are moving
Caption: into lunch so
Caption: we have plenty of time for questions i
Caption: think i'm going to trespass on dr
Caption: ashley's time here and ask you to stay
Caption: but if you did want to make a move and
Caption: grab your lunch now you'd be very
Caption: welcome to do so um i see we have a
Caption: question here
Caption: thank you just quickly
Caption: top down versus bottom up ai and how's
Caption: the development going alongside as well
Caption: as
Caption: so top down is probably that symbolic
Caption: approach yes right and i think it
Caption: suffers from it's fragile you can write
Caption: some rules but they don't actually work
Caption: in every case so it breaks and doesn't
Caption: work properly that's what we found with
Caption: expert systems
Caption: whereas bottom up when things emerge
Caption: they tend to be more stable and they can
Caption: handle things which aren't exactly what
Caption: you predicted so bottom up is definitely
Caption: the way to go and we see all the the
Caption: stuff we're seeing from abs and in the
Caption: phones have neural networks now it's
Caption: emergent and learning these things
Caption: what about teaching and artificial
Caption: intelligence being
Caption: ethics and
Caption: morals this where it comes back to i
Caption: think a bit more about language and
Caption: words and what do they mean and how what
Caption: consequences they have you know language
Caption: is just behavior so i can say i'm moral
Caption: and i can say it a hundred times doesn't
Caption: mean i'm going to behave morally right
Caption: it doesn't control our behavior language
Caption: is just a behavior
Caption: but the correlationship between that
Caption: language and the behavior and the
Caption: consistency between the two sure it but
Caption: it doesn't have to exist there are many
Caption: criminals who think of themselves as
Caption: good people and honest and they go and
Caption: commit crimes so so it doesn't we're not
Caption: we're not driven by our logic we're
Caption: driven by the behavior we learn and
Caption: experience and i missed a section there
Caption: on describing complex behavior just
Caption: briefly i believe we actually learn by
Caption: just seeing patterns and replaying those
Caption: patterns using very
Caption: complex hierarchical association engine
Caption: as i call it so we're just behaving what
Caption: we've seen and we replay those behaviors
Caption: over and over and we you know doing
Caption: anything it's basically just replaying
Caption: behaviors in certain contexts
Caption: so language is that you know i learned
Caption: to say things and i
Caption: last question when you're a diverse
Caption: individuals
Caption: well out of my scope there out of my
Caption: scope we've all got different brains
Caption: with different you know functions in
Caption: these different areas and uh different
Caption: abilities to abstract and different
Caption: learning rates so there's a wide
Caption: variation but i would call them all
Caption: computational systems so
Caption: i'm sorry hey um really good talk thank
Caption: you i
Caption: i agree with you i think there's
Caption: probably a lot of scientific benefit to
Caption: be gained by potentially giving
Caption: consciousness and certain other sort of
Caption: like metaphysical abilities for
Caption: robots to be able to to do
Caption: but in the scientific community we're
Caption: typically bounded by sets of rules of
Caption: what we not just what we can do but what
Caption: we should do so how do you feel you know
Caption: what the ethical
Caption: implications might be of giving the
Caption: robot the ability to feel pain yeah it's
Caption: a good question it's a good question
Caption: if you think of us as just machines
Caption: experiencing pain
Caption: we're just machines experiencing pain
Caption: robots are just machines experiencing
Caption: pain we know we've made a guess that
Caption: it's biologically or evolutionary
Caption: advantage to feel pain
Caption: if we give that ability then we put pain
Caption: on them it's the same as putting pain on
Caption: a person
Caption: so you have to take a consideration of
Caption: that
Caption: um because it's really innate that
Caption: feeling of pain is so deep and so strong
Caption: in your system that
Caption: it's sort of a part of you so if you
Caption: make pain or
Caption: hurt a robot then the same sort of thing
Caption: so you'd be responsible for it i guess
Caption: what's
Caption: good questions thank you
Caption: i was wondering what your feedback would
Caption: be on the
Caption: call out that the google ai
Caption: may or may not be sentinel yeah sure
Caption: what are your thoughts on that so i
Caption: don't know anything about the project
Caption: particularly that one they were talking
Caption: about but it's mainly what they're doing
Caption: they're training these systems on large
Caption: amounts of text
Caption: to respond with text so they get they
Caption: learn lots of context which is what i
Caption: was going to explain in the extra slides
Caption: there your cortex is basically a
Caption: hierarchical context engine so it learns
Caption: if you're in this context in this
Caption: context in this state you say this
Caption: and this is what they did they put lots
Caption: of training on if you see this sentence
Caption: you say this sentence and you have huge
Caption: millions and millions of training but
Caption: the problem there again is they're
Caption: working at that symbolic level
Caption: all right
Caption: they're saving graces they don't have if
Caption: then rules there's statistics between
Caption: the symbols if you see this symbol then
Caption: statistically this one's more likely
Caption: than this one so they're sort of halfway
Caption: between the continuous
Caption: and the discrete they're sort of halfway
Caption: there the symbols are fixed
Caption: but they're um rules are sort of
Caption: continuous and change with learning
Caption: so
Caption: whether it's conscious or not
Caption: again i guess would come back to
Caption: consciousness again is different than
Caption: this being computational i think it
Caption: would be a computational system it
Caption: understands when you say
Caption: it's raining oh yes i'll take my
Caption: umbrella so it's behaving consistently
Caption: at the symbolic level so it understands
Caption: the semantics of raining an
Caption: umbrella but the issue there and this
Caption: was just reminding we had an extra slide
Caption: is that ai system is not grounded and
Caption: what i mean by grounded is we actually
Caption: experience rain and see rain it's just
Caption: getting text in and text out
Caption: so it really doesn't know what rain is
Caption: it's just saying what it needs to say to
Caption: respond correctly to that rain
Caption: so i think it's understands rain in its
Caption: concept of rain defined by its semantics
Caption: and symbols but it has is not grounded
Caption: like a real robot would be and can
Caption: experience rain
Caption: so i think they're computational but i
Caption: wouldn't go so far as to say they're
Caption: aware or self-aware or conscious it's
Caption: just this computation the semantics are
Caption: there because we've learned so much but
Caption: i wouldn't call it sentient
Caption: are you comfortable for some more
Caption: questions happy too people have some
Caption: questions
Caption: um with the different levels of um
Caption: abstraction of um physical functional
Caption: etc
Caption: do you think the different levels have
Caption: any irreducible emotional properties or
Caption: they're just useful abstractions in each
Caption: level
Caption: um i'm not really sure i don't have an
Caption: answer to that um
Caption: irreducible properties
Caption: uh now we know the symbolic level needs
Caption: to represent
Caption: uh it's it's just the abstraction
Caption: is so important i think that's the most
Caption: important aspect of this and i sort of
Caption: alluded to it you know i had a question
Caption: i use when i'm trying to explain
Caption: abstraction to people how useful it is
Caption: if i told you there are 10 billion atoms
Caption: here and this is how they're all
Caption: configured i gave you the exact location
Caption: and i said that's the car i want go and
Caption: buy it
Caption: you wouldn't be able to tell what color
Caption: the car is let alone what model and what
Caption: engine so although you have all the
Caption: detail of the physical system every
Caption: little specific detail
Caption: you're losing what you get at the higher
Caption: level so ignoring the detail can
Caption: actually be more useful than the lower
Caption: level so that's what we get from the
Caption: abstractions
Caption: having that symbolic level says we can
Caption: ignore the functional states and writing
Caption: the symbols so we get command
Caption: consistent semantics is the benefit but
Caption: i don't know of any irreducible
Caption: properties of these different levels
Caption: particularly so it's a limitation of
Caption: like the human mind or the processing as
Caption: opposed to
Caption: reality itself it's
Caption: yeah it's a human the human brain is
Caption: learning
Caption: symbols and learning semantics and it's
Caption: wired at a neural level so that
Caption: eventually learns something which is
Caption: consistent and allows us to survive in
Caption: the world you know you could be
Caption: programmed wrong so you then come out
Caption: with wrong semantics and you're bumping
Caption: into everything and you can't talk and
Caption: get your wife and try to put it on your
Caption: head
Caption: that wouldn't work but luckily our
Caption: learning tends to end us up with a
Caption: semantic system that is useful that's
Caption: what evolution has given us and that's
Caption: what ai is trying to do build systems
Caption: that learn from experiences and become
Caption: useful
Caption: thank you very much for your attention
Caption: thank you happy to answering other
Caption: questions if you want but thank you
Caption: hannah great talk thank you so much
Caption: thank you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: first
Caption: [Music]
Caption: done
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our puzzles
Caption: this is like my dream come true i've
Caption: always wanted to join scott held
Caption: someone's
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: chickens
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer oh
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: foreign
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: uh
Caption: [Music]
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my
Caption: [Music]
Caption: office this is nerd's nerding what we're
Caption: doing is we're talking to people all
Caption: over the world because we're stuck in
Caption: our houses
Caption: my dream come true i've always wanted to
Caption: join scott held someone's
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client
Caption: confidence at insight we know the power
Caption: of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering it
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and i think that when they see when they
Caption: see the cereal box they say okay that's
Caption: carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge maths nerd
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stop
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am
Caption: cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: pinkberry
Caption: as you can tell by the accent i am
Caption: french very very permanent accent
Caption: so the very completely makes sense as
Caption: for the being no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a big background with
Caption: hello kitty riding a unicorn
Caption: it does not reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of
Caption: sparks and enjoy and so yeah so being
Caption: very it is
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet and it's when people ask me how
Caption: to pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong
Caption: work to inspire is very something that
Caption: we live by i believe we definitely see
Caption: how much passion we are for quality and
Caption: how much we want to convey this as a
Caption: client we don't just go for
Caption: target we always try to go a little bit
Caption: further and we try to inspire each other
Caption: by learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring we better build
Caption: better personally i always try to be
Caption: better than yesterday
Caption: that's always been me so i'm better than
Caption: yesterday and i'll be better tomorrow i
Caption: also got a lot of training opportunities
Caption: and planning because there's a vast
Caption: library of training courses available
Caption: that i can just access anytime before i
Caption: join planet like when you want to learn
Caption: something google first right and then
Caption: when you google something you always
Caption: have to pay for something and that's not
Caption: that's not what i want to do so it's
Caption: really it's really good that planet
Caption: offers these free courses for me and i
Caption: don't have to feel pressured about
Caption: buying something just so i can improve
Caption: my skills and use them for work
Caption: planet always encourages learning and
Caption: learning is a good way to just
Caption: accelerate your career growth top-notch
Caption: testing is um
Caption: it's awesome
Caption: it's it's really cool to be around
Caption: people who are so passionate so driven
Caption: to do what they do
Caption: and who always want to
Caption: want to learn and get better
Caption: i think that's really important and i
Caption: think it's going to be a driving factor
Caption: going forward in in the it industry in
Caption: general
Caption: top one is the best of the best and for
Caption: me it's
Caption: if you want to grow up in your carrier
Caption: you are at the right place because we
Caption: have got all the training materials
Caption: right people and right opportunities
Caption: yeah whatever you need to progress in
Caption: your career you have got everything in
Caption: here
Caption: to boost your experience and boost your
Caption: personality everything in a compact pack
Caption: that's what planet is for me
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: mark where are you mark open you turn
Caption: your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our
Caption: dream come puppies i've always wanted to
Caption: join scott held someone's
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: tell me the best thing that's happened
Caption: while i was gone i made your dad ate
Caption: healthy like you said he even tried the
Caption: broccoli eat it
Caption: then i helped him make his work much
Caption: better
Caption: and we found the perfect outfit to wear
Caption: to my party
Caption: but i really needed to wind down before
Caption: bed so i turned my hand into a starfish
Caption: my best friend is you being back
Caption: [Music]
Caption: by applying market leading technology
Caption: solutions through our lifecycle services
Caption: we help clients realize business
Caption: outcomes through our advice integration
Caption: and operational services
Caption: moq digital helps clients to fully
Caption: understand their it needs adopt the
Caption: right solution and provide ongoing
Caption: support to maximize their investment
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: right
Caption: first
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hi
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on uh
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that
Caption: uh the app is almost ready uh we just
Caption: need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: first
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on uh
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is office nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: my dream come true i've always wanted to
Caption: join scott held someone's proof
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering it
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and
Caption: i think that when they see when they see
Caption: the cereal box they say okay that's
Caption: carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge maths nerd
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stopped
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: i am cassandra i am a test automation
Caption: especially
Caption: pinkberry
Caption: as you can tell by the accent i am
Caption: french very very prominent accent
Caption: so the very completely makes sense as
Caption: for the being no matter the client no
Caption: matter where i was working it always was
Caption: a pink background with
Caption: hello kitty riding a unicorn it does not
Caption: reflect who i am outside
Caption: clearly but i think it brings a little
Caption: bit of
Caption: sparks and enjoy and so yeah so being
Caption: better it is
Caption: my name is kong i'm a consultant here at
Caption: planet and it's when people ask me how
Caption: to pronounce my name i always say
Caption: i'm not the king but the kong
Caption: but after joining planet
Caption: i am the king and i'm the kong
Caption: work to inspire is very something that
Caption: we live by i believe we definitely see
Caption: how much passion we are for quality and
Caption: how much we want to convey this as a
Caption: client we don't just go for
Caption: target we always try to go a little bit
Caption: further and we try to inspire each other
Caption: by learning new skills having new
Caption: challenges and taking them and i think
Caption: it's very inspiring we better build
Caption: better personally i always try to be
Caption: better than yesterday
Caption: that's always been me
Caption: so i'm better than yesterday and i'll be
Caption: better tomorrow but i also got a lot of
Caption: training opportunities and planning
Caption: because there's a vast
Caption: library of training courses available
Caption: that i can just access anytime before i
Caption: join planet like when you want to learn
Caption: something google first right and then
Caption: when you google something you always
Caption: have to pay for something and that's not
Caption: that's not what i want to do so it's
Caption: really it's really good that planet
Caption: offers these free courses for me and i
Caption: don't have to feel pressured about
Caption: buying something just so i can improve
Caption: my skills and use them for work
Caption: planet always encourages learning and
Caption: learning is a good way to just
Caption: accelerate your career growth top-notch
Caption: testing is um
Caption: it's awesome
Caption: it's it's
Caption: really cool to be around people who are
Caption: so passionate so driven
Caption: to do what they do
Caption: and who always want to want to learn and
Caption: get better
Caption: i think that's really important and i
Caption: think it's going to be a driving factor
Caption: going forward in in the it industry in
Caption: general
Caption: top 1 is the best of the best and for me
Caption: it's
Caption: if you want to grow up in your carrier
Caption: you are at the right place because we
Caption: have got all the training materials
Caption: right people and right opportunities
Caption: yeah whatever you need to progress in
Caption: your carrier you have got everything in
Caption: here
Caption: to boost your experience and boost your
Caption: personality everything in a compact pack
Caption: that's what planet is for me
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: uh
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on uh
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our pockets
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: tell me the best thing that's happened
Caption: while i was gone i made sure dad ate
Caption: healthy like you said he even tried the
Caption: broccoli eat it
Caption: then i helped him make his work much
Caption: better
Caption: and we found the perfect outfit to wear
Caption: to my party
Caption: but i really needed to wind down before
Caption: bed so i turned my hand into a starfish
Caption: my best friend is you being back
Caption: [Music]
Caption: by applying market-leading technology
Caption: solutions through our lifecycle services
Caption: we help clients realize business
Caption: outcomes through our advice integration
Caption: and operational services moq digital
Caption: helps clients to fully understand their
Caption: it needs adopt the right solution and
Caption: provide ongoing support to maximize
Caption: their investment
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]
Caption: first
Caption: hi
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: uh
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our poses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott handsome
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we need it asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now off zero it's an
Caption: identity platform fast easy logins just
Caption: what the boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use observer can do that yeah
Caption: but it needs to be secure we can't have
Caption: our app compromised by breaches not a
Caption: problem and it needs to scale if we get
Caption: hit with a ton of traffic and if it
Caption: stalls or freezes up i will get fired we
Caption: can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it i got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: like
Caption: [Music]
Caption: first
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my
Caption: [Music]
Caption: this is nerd's office
Caption: what we're doing is we're talking to
Caption: people all over the world because we're
Caption: stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott handsome
Caption: what do you want
Caption: [Music]
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: how a company managed an overnight
Caption: transition to remote work for 100 000
Caption: teammates ambition is how a children's
Caption: hospital built an app to reduce stress
Caption: for families ambition is how a law firm
Caption: rallied against a malware attack to
Caption: reclaim control and prevent a
Caption: devastating breach of client confidence
Caption: at insight we know the power of ambition
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we've grown from a small technology
Caption: provider founded by two young brothers
Caption: to a fortune 500 company offering it
Caption: services and solutions for all for more
Caption: than 30 years people have trusted us to
Caption: turn ambitious projects into meaningful
Caption: outcomes
Caption: what will your ambitious story be
Caption: now is the time to do big things
Caption: together now is the time
Caption: to be ambitious
Caption: [Music]
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: my name is carol i'm a test engineer
Caption: my call sign is special case you might
Caption: be familiar with it you see it in cereal
Caption: boxes it's my call sign because i like
Caption: eating i eat a lot when people see me
Caption: they always see me eating and they
Caption: always ask me carol why are you eating
Caption: and
Caption: i think that when they see when they see
Caption: the cereal box they say okay that's
Caption: carol
Caption: hi i'm joshni i'm a test engineer they
Caption: call me gesture because i always have a
Caption: smile on my face whatever situation i'm
Caption: in
Caption: my name is jaden i'm an automation
Caption: engineer here at planet my call sign is
Caption: digit because i'm a huge huge math nerd
Caption: uh
Caption: it is it is it is my primary major um
Caption: but i often get called out
Caption: on how i never never ever ever stop
Caption: talking about maths
Caption: i just love maths
Caption: how is everybody today
Caption: yeah
Caption: fantastic
Caption: uh welcome welcome to our panel i
Caption: honestly wasn't expecting a full house
Caption: so this is fantastic welcome to our
Caption: panel on flexible working and inclusive
Caption: teams today we have four very talented
Caption: experienced uh and interesting panelists
Caption: for you today and i am not going to talk
Caption: too much
Caption: um i am hoping that i can get the
Caption: panelists to intro themselves
Caption: and and we'll have a great discussion
Caption: you can see a qr code
Caption: sitting there if you have any questions
Caption: or you wish to upvote any of the
Caption: questions that are
Caption: in our current um
Caption: slido
Caption: moderated panel session you can do so
Caption: via that link
Caption: i am
Caption: looking at them
Caption: over here
Caption: and
Caption: when i have a particular question it
Caption: will come up on the screen okay so this
Caption: is pretty dynamic overall
Caption: let's have some fun let's have some fun
Caption: okay
Caption: uh so if you don't know me my name is
Caption: rebecca waters i am a software engineer
Caption: now
Caption: manager people manager
Caption: at a large technology company
Caption: i have here ryan oakley hi ryan how are
Caption: you doing i'm good i'm good i'm a
Caption: software developer uh who's nervous i
Caption: have autism i'm currently working on a
Caption: cloud infrastructure team again for a
Caption: large organization
Caption: and as part of my work and in my free
Caption: time i do new diversity advocacy where i
Caption: really focus on the strengths they can
Caption: bring to organization
Caption: so hi tina thank you for joining us on
Caption: the panel tina is here as our industry
Caption: expert
Caption: no problem no problem what else can you
Caption: tell us about tina tina oh okay
Caption: that was a lot of times you said my name
Caption: there in case you can catch everyone um
Caption: so i
Caption: am tina i
Caption: am
Caption: i'm ceo of a company called balrise
Caption: which is a technology recruitment
Caption: company i'm looking at my two two of my
Caption: amazing team here um
Caption: so
Caption: we are fortunate enough to work with a
Caption: lot of different businesses in hiring
Caption: diverse teams and helping them make sure
Caption: that they give them inclusive
Caption: environments and in my
Caption: spare time and i am co-chair of women in
Caption: technology wa
Caption: so yeah that's me awesome thank you so
Caption: much for joining us tina louise i
Caption: actually work with the louise
Caption: and i said to her a few weeks ago hi
Caption: um louise would you like to do a bit of
Caption: an intro
Caption: yeah yeah i also work at a large
Caption: technology company yeah funnily enough
Caption: yeah i've
Caption: obviously been in the industry for a
Caption: long time i've had a lot of roles but
Caption: i've been at telus for a very long time
Caption: now and have enjoyed every minute of it
Caption: it's the first organization where i came
Caption: out as aboriginal
Caption: it's a different sort of coming out
Caption: isn't it
Caption: because i'm obviously not coloured
Caption: it's
Caption: i was encouraged as a child to
Caption: not
Caption: identify
Caption: and so it's it's
Caption: been an interesting journey through
Caption: um that at while i've been in the
Caption: organization
Caption: and um yeah that's you
Caption: fantastic
Caption: and our final panelist today is teresa
Caption: hi teresa hello how you doing i'm doing
Caption: all right a little bit nervous now that
Caption: i'm sitting up here but okay
Caption: now teresa what's your field
Caption: yep so i am a user experience designer
Caption: um i'm the senior
Caption: a senior user experience designer at
Caption: moodle which is an open source learning
Caption: management system
Caption: uh and it's a global distributed team
Caption: i've only been there for about a month
Caption: prior to that i was a senior user
Caption: experience designer at bankwest
Caption: i also have two little boys who factor
Caption: quite heavily into my life
Caption: as well as a lot of different creative
Caption: hobbies
Caption: so another big factor of my life
Caption: fantastic
Caption: so i'm going to dive into some of the
Caption: questions that are coming up on the
Caption: panel and the first one that i can see
Caption: is come on yes
Caption: it's okay i've got
Caption: uh
Caption: an excellent reading voice
Caption: if you inherit or join a team that is
Caption: not at all diverse in terms of gender
Caption: ethnicity etc
Caption: what can you do to improve that you
Caption: can't just fire a bunch of people and
Caption: replace them
Caption: so what can you do instead
Caption: i think perhaps
Caption: i i'm looking at everybody here i i know
Caption: we've got a few people in leadership
Caption: positions um louise would you like to
Caption: to have a think about that one yeah i
Caption: think it's actually
Caption: um really an easy thing to think about
Caption: we're all different we're all diverse
Caption: anyway even if you even if your team is
Caption: full of white male middle-aged males
Caption: every one of them will have a different
Caption: background different
Caption: priorities in their lives
Caption: and you just look for the diversity and
Caption: you'll see it
Caption: yeah that's a fantastic
Caption: a fantastic approach thanks louise tina
Caption: do you have some ideas
Caption: it's a it's a tricky one and when you
Caption: inherit a team i think um it's it's
Caption: always easier to embed a culture that uh
Caption: in a team that you um build from scratch
Caption: but i think
Caption: setting the intent of having a look
Caption: around the table i think i agree
Caption: everyone has a different diverse
Caption: thinking and
Caption: acknowledging that but also
Caption: um acknowledging the perspectives that
Caption: you might not have around the table at
Caption: that point you know i think someone's
Caption: changed the phrase from culture fit to
Caption: culture ad and i do really like that
Caption: sense because culture fit is expecting
Caption: someone to fit into your organization
Caption: culture ad is
Caption: respecting what someone can bring to the
Caption: table that you might not already have
Caption: and i think it's having a look at that
Caption: especially in technology because you
Caption: want technology to
Caption: be fit for purpose for
Caption: um the demographic multiple demographic
Caption: you know um that you're targeting
Caption: whether that's your end users or your
Caption: customers um or businesses so
Caption: having diverse teams in tech is really
Caption: important to make sure that tech
Caption: fits everyone's needs so
Caption: you know who haven't you got at that
Caption: table who haven't you got as part of
Caption: that tech team
Caption: and make a conscious effort to
Caption: make sure when you are hiring next that
Caption: you are actively looking for people that
Caption: can add to the people you already have i
Caption: think it's a longer process because no
Caption: you can't fire people and you shouldn't
Caption: fire people and because they are
Caption: obviously there on merit so um i think
Caption: that that's really important to um state
Caption: those values and that intent to make
Caption: sure you've got that diverse pool around
Caption: the table and
Caption: it soon becomes clear if you do have
Caption: people within your team that don't buy
Caption: into that concept
Caption: you'll find that they'll often
Caption: self-select out if they're not
Caption: on board with going down that journey as
Caption: well yeah thanks tina a really important
Caption: point
Caption: uh teresa you work from home
Caption: yes yes i do so i have a question here
Caption: and i i do apologize this is not my
Caption: laptop this is amy's laptop so amy will
Caption: be coming back in at some point to help
Caption: me sign back in so we're just going to
Caption: uh listen to my voice and enjoy the
Caption: pictures that windows gives us
Caption: so uh i have a question here if you're
Caption: working from home what's your morning
Caption: routine and do you use any time
Caption: management
Caption: okay so i've been working from home like
Caption: many of us i suppose who are able to um
Caption: on and off the past couple of years
Caption: judah covered um also as i mentioned i
Caption: have two young children so i took leave
Caption: i had been intending to work from home
Caption: to some extent
Caption: and my previous employer bankwest was
Caption: very very happy to do that so it has
Caption: been for the past couple of years but it
Caption: was not an official fully remote role
Caption: moodle is my first uh
Caption: pretty much remote like remote first
Caption: roll um so i suppose i'm still kind of
Caption: figuring out the routine now that it
Caption: feels more permanent even though i was
Caption: effectively remote before
Caption: um
Caption: i imagine it changes for everyone but
Caption: for me personally i end up getting up at
Caption: about six because that's when my kids
Caption: get up
Caption: so
Caption: the way that it works for me is we they
Caption: watch tv we eat some breakfast then my
Caption: husband looks after them while i go get
Caption: ready
Caption: and then get started i usually try to
Caption: get started fairly early so i can finish
Caption: up early and have a bit more more time
Caption: with them
Caption: um my day when i used to commute into
Caption: the city used to involve a lot more
Caption: getting dressed and thinking about what
Caption: i was going to wear and putting on
Caption: makeup and now i don't really have that
Caption: my my office is in my bedroom so i have
Caption: an extremely short commute
Caption: thank you thank you i i do like that
Caption: small commute i hope you still managed
Caption: to you know get some some me time in
Caption: that commute
Caption: a little bit
Caption: um
Caption: ryan i was hoping to ask you uh about
Caption: your experiences with inclusive
Caption: workplaces
Caption: well i was very fortunate to find a very
Caption: inclusive workplace um as somewhere with
Caption: neurodiversity it really comes down to
Caption: finding a team where they're willing to
Caption: take advantage of his strengths and
Caption: finding a workplace where they're
Caption: willing to make accommodations so
Caption: uh one small one is we have open plan
Caption: like most
Caption: uh companies do these days
Caption: and i can't concentrate very well if
Caption: someone's behind me
Caption: so i always get the desk at the end of
Caption: the row and that may seem like a small
Caption: thing to some people
Caption: but for me that's i would be able to
Caption: concentrate otherwise
Caption: um i also as i said i have a principal
Caption: engineer who
Caption: has a deep understanding of
Caption: neurodiversity and he knows what some
Caption: projects to put on and where i can
Caption: really excel so for example i really
Caption: excel at depth and complexity
Caption: thanks ryan that's a i think fantastic
Caption: to have that support network in
Caption: your workplace right that's a little bit
Caption: about what what tina was talking about
Caption: there too
Caption: the next question is how can you
Caption: overcome the bias from a team
Caption: that predominantly works nine to five
Caption: when you feel like you're the only one
Caption: that is working flexibly
Caption: my goodness
Caption: uh so do we have some flexible workers
Caption: on the panel yeah tina teresa do you
Caption: want to maybe give us
Caption: some of your thoughts around this
Caption: uh it's it's kind of a tricky one i
Caption: suppose i've been lucky enough to work
Caption: with um managers who have really
Caption: exemplified this and i feel like that's
Caption: that's really important to be
Caption: demonstrating that they they have
Caption: particular boundaries or they need that
Caption: flexibility and they're not afraid to
Caption: say so and it's really important to have
Caption: that then example for the team so you
Caption: can go okay it's all right for me to
Caption: step out for a minute to do something
Caption: or to work in you know a pattern which
Caption: which makes more sense for me as long as
Caption: i'm getting my work done i think it
Caption: requires a lot of um
Caption: a lot of trust
Caption: um but uh
Caption: i find that starting with small steps i
Caption: suppose if you're the only person doing
Caption: it
Caption: to create that trust to show look sure
Caption: i'm not working a typical nine to five
Caption: but i've taken this small step the world
Caption: hasn't fallen down everything is still
Caption: getting done and then you can continue
Caption: taking those steps and then as you're
Caption: creating that example then more people
Caption: will be able to follow yeah yeah i think
Caption: the example setting is a really good
Caption: point there teresa it actually reminds
Caption: me
Caption: of my current manager who is really
Caption: vocal about when he's taking time out
Caption: to visit the kids or to pick up the kids
Caption: or to do something else
Caption: and and that's an like
Caption: a
Caption: value that he portrays to let his team
Caption: know that it is okay
Caption: that you have a life
Caption: yeah
Caption: uh we have another question here
Caption: now it feels a little bit similar how
Caption: can we create a flexible and inclusive
Caption: work environment for teams in which some
Caption: team members are required in the office
Caption: at certain times
Caption: and others would be able to work from
Caption: home more flexibly
Caption: i am i'm looking at louise here actually
Caption: because we have some
Caption: you know in-office requirements at our
Caption: work
Caption: uh you know what are some of the tools
Caption: that we use there to manage that yeah we
Caption: have people that have have to work on
Caption: site because of the nature of what
Caption: they're working on
Caption: and the information can't leave the site
Caption: so they can't work from home
Caption: they work in the same team
Caption: as people who
Caption: don't have that restriction at at one or
Caption: other sort of time
Caption: so
Caption: what we do is
Caption: basically
Caption: allow
Caption: flexibility or
Caption: flexibility at any time
Caption: and
Caption: just push the boundary of what we call
Caption: flexibility basically so
Caption: you know if they want to if they need to
Caption: do something during the day
Caption: they'd go and do whatever
Caption: if they want to work whatever hours they
Caption: work whatever hours
Caption: and
Caption: if
Caption: they've got an arrangement where they
Caption: normally work from home on say a
Caption: wednesday but this week they're working
Caption: on classified on information that they
Caption: can't take
Caption: they
Caption: will
Caption: just take that day another day
Caption: if they want so it's it's a matter of
Caption: actually actually being flexible not
Caption: just
Caption: using the words and having a policy of
Caption: being flexible i think there's a
Caption: difference
Caption: between having a policy of flexibility
Caption: and
Caption: having contracts that people sign up to
Caption: to be flexible
Caption: um
Caption: yeah absolutely
Caption: and i like actually being flexible yeah
Caption: i like another point that you made there
Caption: as well which was about the the team
Caption: goal and keeping everybody's
Caption: you know everybody is is mindful of what
Caption: that team goal is
Caption: uh and as long as you recognize that
Caption: overall you're achieving that goal
Caption: together of somebody is in the in the
Caption: office when they need to be and and we
Caption: can manage that together that's a that's
Caption: a really good you know mindset to have
Caption: that you're not there alone
Caption: you're not in this alone
Caption: thank you
Caption: i have another question here
Caption: and thank you for some wonderful
Caption: questions um
Caption: i am trying to keep up with what comes
Caption: at the top so please be aware
Caption: uh bear with me
Caption: this one comes in
Caption: i am currently working remotely for a
Caption: non-profit open source startup based in
Caption: amsterdam
Caption: and i'm the only australia-based
Caption: employee
Caption: how can i recommend or how do you
Caption: recommend i ask uh to be included given
Caption: everyone else is co-located
Caption: wow
Caption: do you want to
Caption: i will try that's a big one and it's a
Caption: complex one um and i will hold my hands
Caption: up and say i haven't um
Caption: managed international teams so um but
Caption: from
Caption: my understanding is what i think the
Caption: first thing you'd need to look at is
Caption: what does inclusion look like for you so
Caption: i think you need to become clearer of
Caption: like what does that look like for some
Caption: because otherwise they'll make
Caption: assumptions and they might put things in
Caption: place that are detrimental inclusion for
Caption: you might be
Caption: jumping onto a team's chat um at some
Caption: point on a friday to um
Caption: catch up with the team and have a quiz
Caption: night or something for other people that
Caption: might be super cringe and you'd hate it
Caption: so i think being clear about how
Caption: what how you what are the points that
Caption: you
Caption: need to feel included and then go to
Caption: them and and state what they are like
Caption: and it may be that it's a couple of
Caption: smaller
Caption: things around um
Caption: uh
Caption: being included in certain chats or
Caption: um asking for information that might be
Caption: a
Caption: watercolor conversation to be passed on
Caption: you know just think of the things that
Caption: that are important to you
Caption: and and kind of be clear about what they
Caption: are i suppose when you're having those
Caption: conversations yeah
Caption: thank you tina
Caption: uh
Caption: i love this one is it appropriate
Caption: for a neurotypical straight white man
Caption: to be pushing for diversity and
Caption: inclusivity within a workplace how can
Caption: we best be allies to the cause
Caption: love it i love it
Caption: uh
Caption: now
Caption: none of our panelists are like
Caption: right in that in that area but ryan
Caption: i am the closest
Caption: um this is actually a conversation i've
Caption: had a lot and
Caption: the answer is of course you can um
Caption: but it's always good to make room for
Caption: lived experience voices
Caption: uh it's also sometimes important for
Caption: straight white men
Caption: to
Caption: start the conversation because you can
Caption: end up with a situation where let's say
Caption: you want to make your workplace more
Caption: accepting of disability people where
Caption: that if people with disability or people
Caption: with neurodivergence don't feel
Caption: comfortable standing up so sometimes you
Caption: need someone who's
Caption: uh for like a better word mainstream
Caption: um to stand up and
Caption: be the voice first and once those lived
Caption: experience voices come in then you can
Caption: start bringing them into the
Caption: conversation and start putting them
Caption: forward if they want to and feel
Caption: comfortable with it
Caption: thank you that's
Caption: an excellent point and i love how clear
Caption: you were able to make that point which
Caption: shows that you are a champion to the
Caption: cause
Caption: and a great ally
Caption: uh the next
Caption: question oh wow they just changed so you
Caption: are dynamically choosing what comes up
Caption: next and we're probably one or two
Caption: questions until the end so get those
Caption: votes in
Caption: how do you balance the desire or the
Caption: need for some staff to fully work from
Caption: home
Caption: and
Caption: with the other
Caption: desire and needs of others for
Caption: face-to-face interactions particularly
Caption: for maybe people who feel isolated at
Caption: home
Caption: in particular in a single cohesive team
Caption: now tina you spoke on this just a moment
Caption: ago i guess in in terms of how to feel
Caption: included is there anything that you
Caption: would add
Caption: um i'd say that um our team are a
Caption: combination of extroverts and introverts
Caption: i think so um there's half of us just
Caption: love working from home and you know we
Caption: we get dragged into the office every now
Caption: and then the other half really missed
Caption: that connection so i think it's it's
Caption: acknowledging both and again being
Caption: curious about what each other needs to
Caption: feel that connection and you know i
Caption: think a couple of us could go two weeks
Caption: with working with the odd check-in and
Caption: still feel motivated where others don't
Caption: so we've come to the conclusion that um
Caption: mostly on a monday and uh jeff always on
Caption: a monday but sometimes on the friday we
Caption: will all be in the office together and
Caption: that's our personal choice and that's
Caption: what we discussed and worked for us um
Caption: as a compromise to have those kind of um
Caption: uh to uh accommodate for both the
Caption: extroverts and the introverts across our
Caption: team
Caption: yeah love it
Caption: thank you
Caption: uh
Caption: there have recently been experiments
Caption: around the world of the effectiveness of
Caption: the four day week
Caption: oh
Caption: this is great do we have many people
Caption: that work part-time with us today
Caption: yeah a fair few a fair few
Caption: uh
Caption: do you see it taking off
Caption: in perth i might go to tina and then
Caption: maybe teresa or somebody who does work
Caption: part-time
Caption: i'm still on the fence with it because i
Caption: can see a lot of benefits but also
Caption: knowing my own personality type i just
Caption: think i would kill myself in those four
Caption: days to still get the same stuff done
Caption: and i'd probably need that day just to
Caption: recover from the four days that i try to
Caption: put in so i i don't know i for me jury's
Caption: out still i'd like to see a lot more
Caption: evidence of how
Caption: successful in theory and it feels like
Caption: it's going to to work and but i can say
Caption: there may be some potential pitfalls
Caption: with it so i i'm
Caption: i'd like to see a few more people
Caption: experiment with it first before um i
Caption: commit to the team
Caption: teresa
Caption: so i've been working four days a week
Caption: since i started at moodle and i love it
Caption: working part-time is amazing
Caption: it was kind of helpful to me in that i
Caption: started to do that this as i started a
Caption: new job so i wasn't taking
Caption: my five-day workload and attempting to
Caption: squish it into a four-day workload i was
Caption: starting with an entirely new one um so
Caption: for me that that really helped
Caption: um it's a little bit different because
Caption: i'm electing to work four days a week
Caption: it's not a you know the four-day work
Caption: week is the idea that you would be paid
Caption: your equivalent salary or that's the
Caption: main flavor of it i suppose but for that
Caption: for that four days um and and that is
Caption: something which i assume would probably
Caption: need a little bit more experimentation
Caption: and a bit more more proof to really
Caption: become more mainstream as tina said yeah
Caption: awesome
Caption: thank you
Caption: the next question is that i find it
Caption: frustrating when leaders come back from
Caption: parental leave and they want to work
Caption: part-time only to be told that the role
Caption: isn't available in this capacity is this
Caption: outdated thinking
Caption: or
Caption: can should the business be more flexible
Caption: with leadership roles so we have five
Caption: minutes left
Caption: and this is this is a good one so uh we
Caption: have a couple of parents up on the panel
Caption: and tina you have just come back from
Caption: parental leave i have so i have a
Caption: three-year-old who's in the wonderful
Caption: child care that ddd put on thank you
Caption: very much for that and i have a five
Caption: week old which is that who's at home
Caption: um with his dad and
Caption: i think that that is such an outdated
Caption: concept like completely outdated so i
Caption: went to put my hand up when i work to
Caption: say i work part-time but i'm technically
Caption: still on parental leave so i'm not sure
Caption: how that looks when i get back yet but
Caption: um for me i'm a leader of two
Caption: organizations so i lead valrose as a ceo
Caption: and i lead women in technology wa as a
Caption: co-chair um they both take up my time um
Caption: i put in a lot of hours but i think to
Caption: say that you can't come back as a leader
Caption: flexibly is i think you're thinking more
Caption: of a manager than a leader i think if
Caption: you're a senior leader um it's a perfect
Caption: opportunity to come back as flexibly
Caption: because it's about being the driver of
Caption: the culture it's about setting the
Caption: strategy it's about trusting your team
Caption: to to kind of execute and do and yeah
Caption: you may need to get in and get in and
Caption: get your hands dirty but if you can't
Caption: like
Caption: you know i just think that it's it's an
Caption: ideal role sometimes to be able to do
Caption: that and yes it can be high pressure um
Caption: but yeah you should at that stage have
Caption: really got a lot more comfortable with
Caption: setting your boundaries with with
Caption: managing your time and being able to do
Caption: that so i think it's an absolutely
Caption: outdated role uh outdated concept sorry
Caption: not about table
Caption: thank you tina are there any other
Caption: people who would like to have a go at
Caption: that question overall or shall i move on
Caption: okay
Caption: so our final question today
Caption: is
Caption: how can remote teams build strong
Caption: relationships with one another
Caption: uh ryan do you have uh
Caption: some remote people in your team
Caption: currently unofficially yes
Caption: so because i work on a cloud team they
Caption: really don't like being in the office
Caption: the main way
Caption: the main way i i see doing it is
Caption: it's good to have a for lack of a better
Caption: word meme culture and teams
Caption: the other thing is you don't need to be
Caption: in person to have coffee
Caption: um
Caption: so and also if you can get the habit of
Caption: trying to get to the point where you're
Caption: comfortable jerking around and battering
Caption: with them within the reads within reason
Caption: that can really help as well
Caption: yeah awesome
Caption: uh thank you
Caption: so
Caption: we do have time for one more question
Caption: and i am just live updating because at
Caption: the moment the questions are like my
Caption: questions which is fine um
Caption: the the next one that i will ask then is
Caption: is flexible working constrained to time
Caption: or place and how else can workplaces be
Caption: flexible now louise
Caption: i'm gonna pick on you here because we
Caption: have quite a you know robust flexible
Caption: working policy and people that do a lot
Caption: of different things so i i know that
Caption: you've got some thoughts on how that can
Caption: work yeah yeah so where we do we have a
Caption: yes a big big policy and it's too big
Caption: too many pages to read
Caption: and you can have
Caption: telus flex
Caption: place
Caption: time
Caption: whatever
Caption: i can't remember all of the things
Caption: but
Caption: i think it's a matter of thinking about
Caption: what it is that makes people
Caption: lives whole
Caption: and then
Caption: ensuring that that they get to that
Caption: chance to to do that so
Caption: using
Caption: using your policy to to
Caption: take away restrictions from people
Caption: um
Caption: and giving them back a lifestyle so um
Caption: so yeah being able to work outside of
Caption: normal hours being able to
Caption: um
Caption: you know work
Caption: start work finish work in the middle of
Caption: the day to do something with the kids
Caption: and then start working again later
Caption: at home
Caption: or whatever you know all these things
Caption: are
Caption: very helpful for people yeah completely
Caption: i like the idea there where you're
Caption: considering the whole self and you know
Caption: work is part of what we do
Caption: so how can we achieve
Caption: our goals personal and professional
Caption: together just our goals generally and
Caption: what can our workplaces do as part of
Caption: one of those goals that we want to
Caption: achieve right because we all want to be
Caption: there
Caption: to some degree
Caption: so so how can we
Caption: ensure that we all actually
Caption: bring our best selves yeah fantastic
Caption: uh so we are actually out of time would
Caption: you believe that went extremely quickly
Caption: it really did uh can i please ask you to
Caption: warmly thank our panelists
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: if you would like to continue the
Caption: conversation
Caption: with anyone i'm sure you can find them
Caption: all on various memes or
Caption: mediums
Caption: memes hopefully not memes
Caption: but maybe i think i've seen a couple of
Caption: gifts already of me moving around on
Caption: stage hopefully no one else so you can
Caption: continue the conversation with our
Caption: panelists at any time and uh and that's
Caption: it enjoy the rest of the day thank you
Caption: so much
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: so
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our
Caption: business
Caption: my dream come true i've always wanted to
Caption: join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: god
Caption: [Music]
Caption: we got a little problem
Caption: as you know our motto is you need a
Caption: professional bodyguard delivered to your
Caption: door in less than half an hour you've
Caption: got it buddy but without an app ain't no
Caption: bodyguard getting delivered nowhere so
Caption: where are we with that uh the app is
Caption: almost ready uh we just need
Caption: three
Caption: more days we needed asap
Caption: okay team what's the status on the app
Caption: we're good to go except our login
Caption: experience is a disaster
Caption: we need something to keep our users data
Caption: private
Caption: and to keep the hackers out
Caption: and it needs to work flawlessly because
Caption: because i don't want to lose one single
Caption: customer i hear you so let's use off
Caption: zero off what now auth0 it's an identity
Caption: platform fast easy logins just what the
Caption: boss wants can we make our own
Caption: authentication service come on the
Caption: ultimate key master you know we don't
Caption: have that kind of time we need to
Caption: confirm identities with passwords
Caption: fingerprint scans whatever the users
Caption: like to use zero can do that yeah but it
Caption: needs to be secure we can't have our app
Caption: compromised by breaches not a problem
Caption: and it needs to scale if we get hit with
Caption: a ton of traffic and if it stalls or
Caption: freezes up i will get fired we can do
Caption: this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: could you guys stop that's really
Caption: distracting
Caption: we did it it's done already yep i think
Caption: our customers are gonna love it we got a
Caption: real app now folks
Caption: [Music]
Caption: you know what i want a bodyguard
Caption: hey we got a customer
Caption: cool app
Caption: my name's steven
Caption: what's up steven
Caption: we can do this
Caption: [Music]
Caption: so
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: bye
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um
Caption: what mark where are you mark open you
Caption: turn your camera on um
Caption: okay you can you can see me
Caption: yeah
Caption: yeah yeah we can see you
Caption: [Music]
Caption: hey friends i'm scott hanselman and i
Caption: was told to give you a tour of my office
Caption: this is nerds nerding what we're doing
Caption: is we're talking to people all over the
Caption: world because we're stuck in our houses
Caption: like my dream come true i've always
Caption: wanted to join scott held someone's
Caption: [Music]
Caption: what do you want
Caption: ambition is a fearless hunger for
Caption: success it drives us to challenge the
Caption: way things are to pursue what seems
Caption: insurmountable to keep going when others
Caption: would stop ambition is how a global
Caption: manufacturer is using ai to empower
Caption: employees with disabilities ambition is
Caption: hey good afternoon welcome back if you
Caption: could grab your seats we've got some
Caption: lightning talks lightning fast lightning
Caption: talks and i didn't get a biography so i
Caption: just made this up after a very brief
Caption: chat i actually know brendan so i have a
Caption: fighting chance brendan's coming to talk
Caption: to us first for 10 minutes followed by
Caption: dan who's over here
Caption: don
Caption: autocorrect
Caption: brendan is in my words not his but
Caption: possibly his too who knows a kick-ass
Caption: consultant and a data magician
Caption: that's um certainly what he was doing
Caption: when we worked together and then don dan
Caption: um
Caption: is a multiple hat wearer working in a
Caption: homegrown aussie quality consultancy and
Caption: by all accounts doing an awful lot of
Caption: stuff so he might be a bit tired
Caption: lots of energy for don
Caption: take it away brendan thank you very much
Caption: data magician in the sense that i make
Caption: my data magically appear and disappear
Caption: um
Caption: so i'm going to be talking today about
Caption: best practice
Caption: and why we should ban it from our
Caption: vocabulary
Caption: no excuses
Caption: so first of all what is best practice
Caption: best practice is
Caption: defining a couple of ways so the
Caption: definite
Caption: dictionary definition
Caption: is really around
Caption: research
Caption: and
Caption: replicable um
Caption: replication of it basically
Caption: um
Caption: a second definition i found was
Caption: essentially following the same the same
Caption: theme
Caption: around replication
Caption: research
Caption: and
Caption: really just
Caption: really going through the different
Caption: options and finding out what is best
Caption: however
Caption: that is often not what people
Caption: mean
Caption: when they talk about best practice
Caption: so first of all i'm going to say that
Caption: again i am a consultant
Caption: i work across a range of different
Caption: industries different clients different
Caption: teams and across the board
Caption: everyone's doing things differently
Caption: everyone thinks they're doing best
Caption: practice
Caption: everyone's doing it differently so that
Caption: should say one thing in and of itself
Caption: that everyone thinks best practice or
Caption: what's best practice to their problem
Caption: is different
Caption: so what do people really mean when they
Caption: say best practice and i'm sure some
Caption: people will recognize
Caption: what they really mean in a few of their
Caption: conversations but a lot of the time
Caption: people are saying
Caption: in conversations when they're deciding
Caption: what uh what solutions to go for
Caption: they're really just saying well this is
Caption: what i know so therefore this is what we
Caption: should do
Caption: or
Caption: well somebody else did it this way
Caption: therefore we should do it this way
Caption: but it doesn't really capture a lot of
Caption: the intricacies that we face when we
Caption: deal within deal with a project within a
Caption: company so what organization a did
Caption: isn't necessarily what organization b
Caption: should do
Caption: so when we talk about best practice it
Caption: doesn't actually give any real
Caption: information we're not saying that
Caption: this option is better because of x y and
Caption: z we're simply saying it's better
Caption: because it's best practice
Caption: and you can't really argue with that
Caption: so
Caption: to elaborate on that a little bit
Caption: when people talk about best practice
Caption: they
Caption: really are using it often as a shield in
Caption: these in these conversations so kind of
Caption: going well this is what i know therefore
Caption: i'll say it's best practice
Caption: and then
Caption: they can't really argue with me because
Caption: how can you argue against best practice
Caption: it's best practice that's why it's
Caption: called best practice and that is a
Caption: genuine conversation i've had
Caption: so
Caption: people will also use this
Caption: as
Caption: a way to
Caption: [Music]
Caption: um also use it as a bit of a shield when
Caption: they don't really understand what it is
Caption: that they're trying to do as well so
Caption: people who
Caption: for example trying to set up a data
Caption: warehouse they know they want a data
Caption: warehouse they don't really know
Caption: what it needs to do and who it needs to
Caption: be used for so they start throwing
Caption: around things like best practice and
Caption: they'll go well we need a kimbel star
Caption: schema because it's best practice and
Caption: it's like is that really going to meet
Caption: our requirements is that really going to
Caption: be useful for the end users like what
Caption: are we actually trying to do
Caption: second of all it gets often used to
Caption: promote things people
Caption: teams organizations they often want to
Caption: say yeah i'm doing best practice it's
Caption: almost a badge of honor
Caption: to kind of say well we're doing better
Caption: than you
Caption: but as i mentioned at the start
Caption: different organizations have different
Caption: problems different solutions everyone's
Caption: doing things differently
Caption: you know
Caption: they're not necessarily saying someone
Caption: doing it good someone doing it bad it's
Caption: different because the environment is
Caption: different the people are different the
Caption: organization's different the problems
Caption: are different the it infrastructure is
Caption: different
Caption: and finally
Caption: some people especially in the leadership
Caption: role will often use the term best
Caption: practice
Caption: to kind of escape some of the
Caption: responsibility
Caption: so they'll go oh we need a data
Caption: warehouse
Caption: they don't want to make decisions around
Caption: well what are we going to implement what
Caption: infrastructure we're going to use
Caption: they're going to say well we're going to
Caption: implement best practice and
Caption: that really just erodes some of this
Caption: that the team
Caption: sort of make up you're not listening to
Caption: different ideas
Caption: and it's really taking away their
Caption: responsibility for the decision
Caption: you know if something goes wrong they go
Caption: well it was best practice you know it's
Caption: not my problem it's best practice
Caption: so
Caption: what are these problems really what is
Caption: this actually causing problems with our
Caption: projects first and foremost
Caption: it's really ignoring different
Caption: ideas that are being put forward if you
Caption: put forward something a different idea
Caption: people are often shooting it down
Caption: because it's not best practice or they
Caption: don't deem it to be best practice
Caption: again i'm hoping the theme here is that
Caption: there's no such thing as best practice
Caption: but
Caption: a lot of people
Caption: will discount things simply because they
Caption: don't know it therefore it's not best
Caption: practice therefore we shouldn't do it
Caption: with promoting
Caption: it often breeds a very toxic work
Caption: culture
Caption: where people's ideas are not shared and
Caption: valued it's very much about promoting
Caption: while we're doing best practice
Caption: therefore we're better therefore you
Caption: should listen to us
Caption: and i've worked across many teams where
Caption: this has actually occurred
Caption: and finally
Caption: avoiding this responsibility
Caption: really does create a lack of leadership
Caption: within the
Caption: the the project team and even within the
Caption: wider team of stakeholders
Caption: so
Caption: overall
Caption: trying to take the concept of best
Caption: practice
Caption: is really removing that
Caption: visibility and understanding of on the
Caption: ability to be able to articulate some of
Caption: these
Caption: these concepts and the reasons why we
Caption: should be doing something
Caption: you know we shouldn't be doing something
Caption: because it's best practice we should be
Caption: doing something because it solves a to
Caption: constraints b
Caption: for user c
Caption: so
Caption: the ability to articulate solutions
Caption: does create a few
Caption: bit extra benefits
Caption: that
Caption: you can't really get when you start
Caption: talking about best practice
Caption: first one is building trust you start
Caption: building trust with people when
Caption: uh so take for example if you start
Caption: talking about best practice
Caption: um
Caption: you're not really creating a
Caption: a sense of trust with your users you're
Caption: saying trust me i know what i'm talking
Caption: about whereas if you explain the reasons
Caption: why and you start engaging with clients
Caption: and users it starts to build some of
Caption: this
Caption: ability to generate the trust that they
Caption: go okay this person does understand our
Caption: problems this person does kind of
Caption: understand our solutions maybe i should
Caption: listen to him
Caption: secondly it generates buy-in
Caption: so
Caption: going that extra step further than
Caption: explaining why we're doing something
Caption: rather than just using the term best
Caption: practice
Caption: we start generating buy-in from
Caption: different stakeholders
Caption: different users people within the
Caption: project group because they understand
Caption: why
Caption: um
Caption: especially from a junior perspective
Caption: with junior people coming in if we say
Caption: you're doing that simply because it's
Caption: best practice they're not learning
Caption: they're not understanding why they're
Caption: not going that one step further to say
Caption: well what is it that we're
Caption: you know trying to achieve and what are
Caption: our constraints what are what are some
Caption: of these these issues that we need to
Caption: work through
Caption: and finally we create a shared vision
Caption: so when people if we do come across a
Caption: problem people can go look i know what
Caption: we're trying to do let me find a
Caption: solution to that and so they've got a
Caption: better understanding as to
Caption: what
Caption: they're looking for they can go that one
Caption: step further they can use their
Caption: initiative because they're
Caption: bought on board as to the reasons why
Caption: so how do we achieve this
Caption: firstly we understand the problem and i
Caption: know this is going to sound very very
Caption: basic for a lot of you but we understand
Caption: the problem so starting from that
Caption: problem
Caption: first
Caption: we then start to organize some of these
Caption: organizational priorities so
Caption: understanding not only what the problem
Caption: is but why it's a problem and what
Caption: they're trying to achieve from it
Caption: understanding constraints so these can
Caption: be anything from cost to
Caption: the politics again
Caption: going into an organization as a
Caption: consultant a lot of the times we
Caption: we have to navigate things like politics
Caption: we have to navigate uh their
Caption: environments we need to navigate
Caption: various different things like even the
Caption: people some people
Caption: you know
Caption: all those those personalities that you
Caption: need to navigate and when we start
Caption: throwing in best practice you're
Caption: basically just creating a bearing going
Caption: look trust me i know what i'm talking
Caption: about
Caption: then exploring the options so once you
Caption: understand what it is we're trying to
Caption: achieve
Caption: i'm putting that towards then coming up
Caption: with the different options now these you
Caption: could go through and say best practice
Caption: et cetera but not using the term best
Caption: practice going cool we can solve this
Caption: and this is a good option to go for
Caption: because it meets our constraints it
Caption: meets our problem
Caption: it meets our goals and suddenly that's a
Caption: much more powerful story
Caption: and then as a team deciding what
Caption: solution to go for
Caption: um
Caption: and so this is then taking it from a
Caption: solution-driven approach where we're
Caption: going all right let's find best practice
Caption: and implement that to okay what are we
Caption: trying to solve cool we're going to
Caption: implement something that's solving that
Caption: problem
Caption: so
Caption: to kind of quickly sum up because i've
Caption: been given the one minute warning
Caption: [Music]
Caption: it's not about changing an entire way of
Caption: working but just changing our mindsets
Caption: to ban the term and i ban the term best
Caption: practice from all of my teams if my
Caption: teams are coming up to me talking about
Caption: problems and they use the term best
Caption: practice i tell them to go away and come
Caption: back to me when they've actually
Caption: done that research and gone come back
Caption: with an actual plan
Caption: and so it just starts with just banning
Caption: those two terms best practice
Caption: thank you very much
Caption: there's my references and thanks to the
Caption: sponsors
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: and here is don thanks mate cheers
Caption: all right i'm just conscious uh we're at
Caption: the end of the day it's the afternoon so
Caption: we're going to try and
Caption: do
Caption: a very quick fire my presentation today
Caption: is a very lightweight type presentation
Caption: it's nice it's it's a brain candy but it
Caption: does have an important message in it and
Caption: that important message is about test
Caption: automation
Caption: and one of the biggest blockers that
Caption: most teams out there get wrong and it's
Caption: what's stopping your automation from
Caption: being successful now i'm going to tell
Caption: this story today about a naked emperor
Caption: is there a naked emperor in your
Caption: development team it's a story that's a
Caption: thousand years old it's been done in 100
Caption: different languages today you're going
Caption: to get a very short very aussie sort of
Caption: version of that
Caption: which is how i like things and we'll
Caption: fire through that and as i'm doing that
Caption: put your thinking caps on and just think
Caption: how what is this guy talking about how
Caption: the hell is this relating to test
Caption: automation see if you can piece it
Caption: together because i'll give you the
Caption: answer at the end
Caption: right so
Caption: before i kick off i really want to thank
Caption: the sponsors of the day it's such a good
Caption: day connecting with people so many
Caption: familiar faces in the audience i hope
Caption: you've all you're all enjoying ddd
Caption: make sure you thank the organizers they
Caption: they volunteer and they spend a lot of
Caption: time putting this thing together each
Caption: year uh and i'm proud to represent
Caption: planet if you haven't seen us on the
Caption: coffee cart we're just around in the
Caption: centre of the auditorium and it's um
Caption: i'd love to offer you a t-shirt but they
Caption: went in like an hour hundreds and
Caption: hundreds of t-shirts but we can offer
Caption: you a coffee
Caption: right
Caption: into the story the story is about an
Caption: emperor so this emperor is a vain bloke
Caption: he's very fixated on his looks he thinks
Caption: he's a good looking rooster but he
Caption: always wants to look better than
Caption: everyone else
Caption: out in his empire he's got these two
Caption: great creators or we'll call them
Caption: developers to give you a clue
Caption: and these guys are really good at making
Caption: things in fact they're so good at making
Caption: things back in those days they thought
Caption: they were magicians
Caption: the emperor gets word of these guys and
Caption: he says look
Caption: brings them into his uh into his throne
Caption: room and he says
Caption: i want you to make me the most
Caption: magnificent outfit
Caption: ever made
Caption: whatever i want to do wherever i want to
Caption: be
Caption: it needs to be a magical outfit
Caption: that makes me look magnificent 24 hours
Caption: a day
Caption: and these guys are like
Caption: they get they get locked away in a room
Caption: and they're thinking uh okay
Caption: that's an interesting challenge we've
Caption: got here
Caption: so they set about doing what they know
Caption: they build things they set up machinery
Caption: they set up equipment and they've got
Caption: this continuous delivery fashion line
Caption: which they're sort of
Caption: uh creating one small problem though
Caption: as they're locked away in this little
Caption: dungeon area
Caption: we don't have any fabric to work with
Caption: what are we meant to do and the emperor
Caption: says look you guys are so talented
Caption: you're so good at making things
Caption: you're practically magicians i'm sure
Caption: you'll work it out
Caption: um
Caption: and they're a bit puzzled they're
Caption: stressing right because these guys are
Caption: going to get their heads locked off by
Caption: this bloke when they show up with
Caption: nothing
Caption: but they know he's he's equally vain and
Caption: equally stupid so
Caption: they come up with an idea because these
Caption: are the smart guys
Caption: in the story
Caption: two days pass the emperor brings them in
Caption: and says right i've given you this
Caption: challenge show me what you've made for
Caption: me show me this magnificent outfit they
Caption: roll in a rack
Caption: full of coat hangers with absolutely
Caption: nothing on it
Caption: and
Caption: they tell him don't worry about it we've
Caption: built you this amazing outfit that's so
Caption: spectacular it's actually magical only
Caption: people that are loyal to the empire can
Caption: see the clothes right it's sort of
Caption: magical clothes
Caption: and
Caption: the emperor is like
Caption: okay yeah i can see them now yeah they
Caption: look spectacular right because he
Caption: doesn't want to be
Caption: disloyal to his own empire
Caption: the guys aren't stupid though i think
Caption: right the moment the emperor goes out of
Caption: here someone's going to tell him he's
Caption: wearing nothing he puts these things on
Caption: which is nothing
Caption: and
Caption: we're going to be in a lot of trouble so
Caption: they tell him why don't you go out in
Caption: the town tomorrow
Caption: do a parade down the main street and
Caption: anyone that says anything
Caption: lop the heads off because they're not
Caption: loyal to the empire
Caption: emperor is right cool i got this next
Caption: day puts on the gear
Caption: goes out down the main street
Caption: thinking he's looking pretty good
Caption: um he's all smiles and giggles there's a
Caption: few people in there in the crowd as you
Caption: can imagine
Caption: sort of a
Caption: bit of murmuring like what is this guy
Caption: what's his idiot doing he's wearing no
Caption: clothes you and i know he's completely
Caption: starkers right he's wearing these
Caption: magnificent clothes of absolutely
Caption: nothing
Caption: um
Caption: no one says anything though because no
Caption: one wants to get their head lopped off
Caption: except for one guy this guy
Caption: and in the story
Caption: this guy is me and
Caption: the reason is this is the guy that
Caption: doesn't care about all that stuff he
Caption: just calls out what he sees and he's
Caption: gonna tell it like it is
Caption: and he says
Caption: hang on what's the emperor doing with no
Caption: clothes
Caption: come on mate no one wants to see that
Caption: get some bloody clothes on
Caption: and at that moment
Caption: the emperor
Caption: realizes he's been made to look like a
Caption: complete fool
Caption: these guys have really set him up for
Caption: failure and and it's actually bloody
Caption: embarrassing because he has nothing on
Caption: cool story what the hell's this got to
Caption: do with test automation i don't worry i
Caption: can see your faces there's sort of like
Caption: lots of furrowed brows out there we'll
Caption: get to it
Caption: so what has it got to do test automation
Caption: well similar if i look around the room
Caption: here we've got lots of great developers
Caption: right in the community we're really good
Caption: at making things creating things
Caption: but we're not magicians
Caption: occasionally
Caption: you get an emperor who will say look
Caption: with test automation can you guys just
Caption: go set that thing up i wanna i want some
Caption: auto magical automated tests please i
Caption: want them to run 24 hours a day ci cd cx
Caption: cz whatever they could ask for anything
Caption: and by the way it should make my coffee
Caption: as well
Caption: so they expect the impossible from the
Caption: developers
Caption: developers will do what they do they'll
Caption: go and get the latest frameworks and
Caption: toolkits they'll set it all up they'll
Caption: build the pipe you've got a nice
Caption: pipeline running
Caption: beautiful
Caption: one
Caption: problem if you don't have fabric
Caption: what are you making you're making
Caption: nothing similar to the story without the
Caption: fabric you've got a lot of machinery a
Caption: lot of time and expense put in and
Caption: you're making nothing
Caption: so what's the fabric when you're
Caption: building test automation what is that
Caption: well it's in the word test right it's in
Caption: the name
Caption: without a good test
Caption: you've got nothing so if you think about
Caption: fabric good thread count right color
Caption: right texture durable wearable good good
Caption: quality characteristics it's the same as
Caption: your tests
Caption: good tests
Caption: are carefully crafted and targeted they
Caption: take a lot of thought to get the right
Caption: tests and they typically
Caption: come from the mind of a tester
Caption: need to be really well made great fabric
Caption: great garments
Caption: great test great test automation but how
Caption: do you get the fabric
Caption: well fabric makers make fabric
Caption: and testers make tests
Caption: okay
Caption: testers
Caption: are our special
Caption: special breed
Caption: and these days we are told
Caption: oh but we're all cross-functional we're
Caption: all unicorns right so we can all we're
Caption: all full stack devs we all code like
Caption: demons um
Caption: i could run the agile rituals better
Caption: than that seasoned scrum master and i
Caption: know more about product ownership than
Caption: the product owner and of course we're
Caption: all legendary testers right
Caption: uh no not so much that's not reality
Caption: that's the textbook the reality is
Caption: we all specialize those those different
Caption: roles are fundamentally different in
Caption: terms of how you think in terms of your
Caption: career progression the study and the
Caption: time you've put into them
Caption: so
Caption: i'll put it to you another way every
Caption: tester out there has dabbled a little
Caption: bit in coding and there's a very small
Caption: number of testers who are so good at
Caption: coding i'd say they're probably as good
Caption: as developers
Caption: but i wouldn't then go out and say hey
Caption: testers you've all dabbled in coding
Caption: you're on our developers go start
Caption: writing our enterprise systems you
Caption: wouldn't do that that would be
Caption: ridiculous
Caption: so
Caption: the reverse is also true when the
Caption: emperors ask developers and they say
Caption: look you guys are amazing at coding you
Caption: should all be involved in testing all
Caption: good developers are but we don't expect
Caption: you to be professional testers because
Caption: that's a different career path it's
Caption: different skills and it's different it's
Caption: a whole different background to life so
Caption: professional testers if you've ever
Caption: worked with one they're a different
Caption: breed
Caption: they think differently
Caption: they are magnets for errors
Caption: a normal person
Caption: normal wait choose my words i'm a tester
Caption: writer so i'll go with that they might
Caption: think of five or five or five things
Caption: that could go wrong a tester will tell
Caption: you 101 things will go wrong they're
Caption: fixated on breaking things not making
Caption: things it's a completely different
Caption: mindset in an interview i can tell you
Caption: within two or three questions whether
Caption: someone's a developer or a tester by how
Caption: they answer those questions whatever
Caption: they think they might be it's quite
Caption: evident brains work differently they've
Caption: also spent years training in their
Caption: profession learning skills techniques
Caption: getting certifications in testing
Caption: specifically for testing to create that
Caption: great fabric or tests
Caption: it's a point that emperors often miss
Caption: now remember the guy in the story
Caption: well in the world of test automation
Caption: that's me i'm not a developer but i do
Caption: get the privilege of working with
Caption: development teams right across perth and
Caption: they open their doors and we see the
Caption: automation that's being produced
Caption: and while some shops are doing an
Caption: incredible job they're creating great
Caption: automation and it's a beautiful thing
Caption: when you see it
Caption: i'd say the majority or many of them
Caption: have emperors in the establishment who
Caption: are spending a lot of money and expense
Caption: putting together toolkits spending a lot
Caption: of time building stuff that
Caption: amounts to a whole lot of nothing if i'm
Caption: being frank
Caption: because i don't have the fabric
Caption: so
Caption: what are the two lessons two takeaways
Caption: from today
Caption: how to spot an acred emperor and how to
Caption: avoid being one yourself like don't be
Caption: that guy that asks people to do the
Caption: impossible well firstly
Caption: professional testers make the great
Caption: tests and that's where you get your
Caption: great test automation it's a key
Caption: ingredient that's often missing and
Caption: that's the point of the talk so if you
Caption: want to spot a naked emperor someone
Caption: that's asking developers to do things
Caption: with no fabric
Caption: the second thing is if you're working in
Caption: an environment where you're not getting
Caption: that great fabric
Caption: don't be afraid to be that guy that just
Caption: calls it out
Caption: because without that people are going to
Caption: continue murmuring in the crowd
Caption: and
Caption: nodding and pretending like yeah we're
Caption: doing great with automation we've got 5
Caption: 000 tests done and there's a whole lot
Caption: of nothing what that does it leaves you
Caption: exposed and that is bloody embarrassing
Caption: so
Caption: if you're looking to make software
Caption: better
Caption: two two tips from today i hope you
Caption: remember them and i'm happy to have
Caption: discussions afterwards but
Caption: hopefully that's been lightweight and
Caption: entertaining as i promised thank you
Caption: very much
Caption: thank you
Caption: thank you don thank you brendan that is
Caption: the last of our talks yeah what a good
Caption: one to finish on nice uh
Caption: nice mental images for us today yeah
Caption: thanks um everybody we are done in this
Caption: room thanks to everyone who's enjoyed a
Caption: session in this room today it's been
Caption: wonderful having you you've now got
Caption: afternoon tea
Caption: followed by your lock note over in the
Caption: main theater and yeah wish you all a
Caption: very safe and pleasant afternoon and
Caption: evening
Caption: [Music]
Caption: bye
Caption: right
Caption: [Music]
Caption: foreign
Caption: um
Caption: [Music]